Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
IntrodUCtIon   |   3
Introduction
T oward greater focus and coherence
Mathematics experiences in early childhood settings should concentrate on 
(1) number (which includes whole number, operations, and relations) and (2) 
geometry, spatial relations, and measurement, with more mathematics learning 
time devoted to number than to other topics. Mathematical process goals 
should be integrated in these content areas. 
	—	Mathematics	Learning	in	Early	Childhood,	National	Research	Council,	2009
The composite standards [of Hong Kong, Korea and Singapore] have a number 
of features that can inform an international benchmarking process for the 
development of K–6 mathematics standards in the U.S. First, the composite 
standards concentrate the early learning of mathematics on the number, 
measurement, and geometry strands with less emphasis on data analysis and 
little exposure to algebra. The Hong Kong standards for grades 1–3 devote 
approximately half the targeted time to numbers and almost all the time 
remaining to geometry and measurement. 
—	Ginsburg,	Leinwand	and	Decker,	2009
Because the mathematics concepts in [U.S.] textbooks are often weak, the 
presentation becomes more mechanical than is ideal. We looked at both 
traditional and non-traditional textbooks used in the US and found this 
conceptual weakness in both.
—	Ginsburg	et	al.,	2005
There are many ways to organize curricula. The challenge, now rarely met, is to 
avoid those that distort mathematics and turn off students.
—	Steen,	2007
For	over	a	decade,	research	studies	of	mathematics	education	in	high-performing	
countries	have	pointed	to	the	conclusion	that	the	mathematics	curriculum	in	the	
United	States	must	become	substantially	more	focused	and	coherent	in	order	to	
improve	mathematics	achievement	in	this	country.	T o	deliver	on	the	promise	of	
common	standards,	the	standards	must	address	the	problem	of	a	curriculum	that	
is	“a	mile	wide	and	an	inch	deep.”	These	Standards	are	a	substantial	answer	to	that	
challenge.
It	is	important	to	recognize	that	“fewer	standards”	are	no	substitute	for	focused	
standards.	Achieving	“fewer	standards”	would	be	easy	to	do	by	resorting	to	broad,	
general	statements.	Instead,	these	Standards	aim	for	clarity	and	specificity.	
Assessing	the	coherence	of	a	set	of	standards	is	more	difficult	than	assessing	
their	focus.	William	Schmidt	and	Richard	Houang	(2002)	have	said	that	content	
standards	and	curricula	are	coherent	if	they	are:
articulated over time as a sequence of topics and performances that are 
logical and reflect, where appropriate, the sequential or hierarchical nature 
of the disciplinary content from which the subject matter derives. That is, 
what and how students are taught should reflect not only the topics that fall 
within a certain academic discipline, but also the key ideas that determine 
how knowledge is organized and generated within that discipline. This implies 

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
IntrodUCtIon   |   4
that to be coherent, a set of content standards must evolve from particulars 
(e.g., the meaning and operations of whole numbers, including simple math 
facts and routine computational procedures associated with whole numbers 
and fractions) to deeper structures inherent in the discipline. These deeper 
structures then serve as a means for connecting the particulars (such as an 
understanding of the rational number system and its properties). (emphasis	
added)
These	Standards	endeavor	to	follow	such	a	design,	not	only	by	stressing	conceptual	
understanding	of	key	ideas,	but	also	by	continually	returning	to	organizing	
principles	such	as	place	value	or	the	properties	of	operations	to	structure	those	
ideas.
In	addition,	the	“sequence	of	topics	and	performances”	that	is	outlined	in	a	body	of	
mathematics	standards	must	also	respect	what	is	known	about	how	students	learn.	
As	Confrey	(2007)	points	out,	developing	“sequenced	obstacles	and	challenges	
for	students…absent	the	insights	about	meaning	that	derive	from	careful	study	of	
learning,	would	be	unfortunate	and	unwise.”	In	recognition	of	this,	the	development	
of	these	Standards	began	with	research-based	learning	progressions	detailing	
what	is	known	today	about	how	students’	mathematical	knowledge,	skill,	and	
understanding	develop	over	time.
Understanding mathematics
These	Standards	define	what	students	should	understand	and	be	able	to	do	in	
their	study	of	mathematics.	Asking	a	student	to	understand	something	means	
asking	a	teacher	to	assess	whether	the	student	has	understood	it.	But	what	does	
mathematical	understanding	look	like?	One	hallmark	of	mathematical	understanding	
is	the	ability	to	justify,	in	a	way	appropriate	to	the	student’s	mathematical	maturity,	
why	a	particular	mathematical	statement	is	true	or	where	a	mathematical	rule	
comes	from.	There	is	a	world	of	difference	between	a	student	who	can	summon	a	
mnemonic	device	to	expand	a	product	such	as	(a	+ b)(x	+	y)	and	a	student	who	
can	explain	where	the	mnemonic	comes	from.	The	student	who	can	explain	the	rule	
understands	the	mathematics,	and	may	have	a	better	chance	to	succeed	at	a	less	
familiar	task	such	as	expanding	(a	+ b	+	c)(x	+	y).	Mathematical	understanding	and	
procedural	skill	are	equally	important,	and	both	are	assessable	using	mathematical	
tasks	of	sufficient	richness.
The	Standards	set	grade-specific	standards	but	do	not	define	the	intervention	
methods	or	materials	necessary	to	support	students	who	are	well	below	or	well	
above	grade-level	expectations.	It	is	also	beyond	the	scope	of	the	Standards	to		
define	the	full	range	of	supports	appropriate	for	English	language	learners	and	
for	students	with	special	needs.	At	the	same	time,	all	students	must	have	the	
opportunity	to	learn	and	meet	the	same	high	standards	if	they	are	to	access	the	
knowledge	and	skills	necessary	in	their	post-school	lives.	The	Standards	should	
be	read	as	allowing	for	the	widest	possible	range	of	students	to	participate	fully	
from	the	outset,	along	with	appropriate	accommodations	to	ensure	maximum	
participaton	of	students	with	special	education	needs.	For	example,	for	students	
with	disabilities	reading	should	allow	for	use	of	Braille,	screen	reader	technology,	or	
other	assistive	devices,	while	writing	should	include	the	use	of	a	scribe,	computer,	
or	speech-to-text	technology.	In	a	similar	vein,	speaking	and	listening	should	be	
interpreted	broadly	to	include	sign	language.	No	set	of	grade-specific	standards	
can	fully	reflect	the	great	variety	in	abilities,	needs,	learning	rates,	and	achievement	
levels	of	students	in	any	given	classroom.	However,	the	Standards	do	provide	clear	
signposts	along	the	way	to	the	goal	of	college	and	career	readiness	for	all	students.
The	Standards	begin	on	page	6	with	eight	Standards	for	Mathematical	Practice.	

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
IntrodUCtIon   |   5
How to read the grade level standards
Standards define	what	students	should	understand	and	be	able	to	do.	
Clusters are	groups	of	related	standards.	Note	that	standards	from	different	clusters	
may	sometimes	be	closely	related,	because	mathematics		
is	a	connected	subject.	
domains	are	larger	groups	of	related	standards.	Standards	from	different	domains	
may	sometimes	be	closely	related.	
number and operations in Base ten   3.nBt
Use place value understanding and properties of operations to 
perform multi-digit arithmetic.
1.	 Use	place	value	understanding	to	round	whole	numbers	to	the	nearest	
10	or	100.
2.	 Fluently	add	and	subtract	within	1000	using	strategies	and	algorithms	
based	on	place	value,	properties	of	operations,	and/or	the	relationship	
between	addition	and	subtraction.
3.	 Multiply	one-digit	whole	numbers	by	multiples	of	10	in	the	range	
10-90	(e.g.,	9	×	80,	5	×	60)	using	strategies	based	on	place	value	and	
properties	of	operations.
These	Standards	do	not	dictate	curriculum	or	teaching	methods.	For	example,	just	
because	topic	A	appears	before	topic	B	in	the	standards	for	a	given	grade,	it	does	
not	necessarily	mean	that	topic	A	must	be	taught	before	topic	B.	A	teacher	might	
prefer	to	teach	topic	B	before	topic	A,	or	might	choose	to	highlight	connections	by	
teaching	topic	A	and	topic	B	at	the	same	time.	Or,	a	teacher	might	prefer	to	teach	a	
topic	of	his	or	her	own	choosing	that	leads,	as	a	byproduct,	to	students	reaching	the	
standards	for	topics	A	and	B.
What	students	can	learn	at	any	particular	grade	level	depends	upon	what	they	
have	learned	before.	Ideally	then,	each	standard	in	this	document	might	have	been	
phrased	in	the	form,	“Students	who	already	know	...	should	next	come	to	learn	....”	
But	at	present	this	approach	is	unrealistic—not	least	because	existing	education	
research	cannot	specify	all	such	learning	pathways.		Of	necessity	therefore,	
grade	placements	for	specific	topics	have	been	made	on	the	basis	of	state	and	
international	comparisons	and	the	collective	experience	and	collective	professional	
judgment	of	educators,	researchers	and	mathematicians.	One	promise	of	common	
state	standards	is	that	over	time	they	will	allow	research	on	learning	progressions	
to	inform	and	improve	the	design	of	standards	to	a	much	greater	extent	than	is	
possible	today.	Learning	opportunities	will	continue	to	vary	across	schools	and	
school	systems,	and	educators	should	make	every	effort	to	meet	the	needs	of	
individual	students	based	on	their	current	understanding.
These	Standards	are	not	intended	to	be	new	names	for	old	ways	of	doing	business.	
They	are	a	call	to	take	the	next	step.	It	is	time	for	states	to	work	together	to	build	
on	lessons	learned	from	two	decades	of	standards	based	reforms.	It	is	time	to	
recognize	that	standards	are	not	just	promises	to	our	children,	but	promises	we	
intend	to	keep.
domain
ClusterStandard