Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
StandardS for matHematICal praCtICe   |   6
mathematics | Standards  
for mathematical Practice
The	Standards	for	Mathematical	Practice	describe	varieties	of	expertise	that	
mathematics	educators	at	all	levels	should	seek	to	develop	in	their	students.	
These	practices	rest	on	important	“processes	and	proficiencies”	with	longstanding	
importance	in	mathematics	education.	The	first	of	these	are	the	NCTM	process	
standards	of	problem	solving,	reasoning	and	proof,	communication,	representation,	
and	connections.	The	second	are	the	strands	of	mathematical	proficiency	specified	
in	the	National	Research	Council’s	report	Adding It Up:	adaptive	reasoning,	strategic	
competence,	conceptual	understanding	(comprehension	of	mathematical	concepts,	
operations	and	relations),	procedural	fluency	(skill	in	carrying	out	procedures	
flexibly,	accurately,	efficiently	and	appropriately),	and	productive	disposition	
(habitual	inclination	to	see	mathematics	as	sensible,	useful,	and	worthwhile,	coupled	
with	a	belief	in	diligence	and	one’s	own	efficacy).	
1   Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them.
Mathematically	proficient	students	start	by	explaining	to	themselves	the	meaning	
of	a	problem	and	looking	for	entry	points	to	its	solution.	They	analyze	givens,	
constraints,	relationships,	and	goals.	They	make	conjectures	about	the	form	and	
meaning	of	the	solution	and	plan	a	solution	pathway	rather	than	simply	jumping	into	
a	solution	attempt.	They	consider	analogous	problems,	and	try	special	cases	and	
simpler	forms	of	the	original	problem	in	order	to	gain	insight	into	its	solution.	They	
monitor	and	evaluate	their	progress	and	change	course	if	necessary.	Older	students	
might,	depending	on	the	context	of	the	problem,	transform	algebraic	expressions	or	
change	the	viewing	window	on	their	graphing	calculator	to	get	the	information	they	
need.	Mathematically	proficient	students	can	explain	correspondences	between	
equations,	verbal	descriptions,	tables,	and	graphs	or	draw	diagrams	of	important	
features	and	relationships,	graph	data,	and	search	for	regularity	or	trends.	Y ounger	
students	might	rely	on	using	concrete	objects	or	pictures	to	help	conceptualize	
and	solve	a	problem.	Mathematically	proficient	students	check	their	answers	to	
problems	using	a	different	method,	and	they	continually	ask	themselves,	“Does	this	
make	sense?”	They	can	understand	the	approaches	of	others	to	solving	complex	
problems	and	identify	correspondences	between	different	approaches.	
2   Reason abstractly and quantitatively.
Mathematically	proficient	students	make	sense	of	quantities	and	their	relationships	
in	problem	situations.	They	bring	two	complementary	abilities	to	bear	on	problems	
involving	quantitative	relationships:	the	ability	to	decontextualize—to	abstract	
a	given	situation	and	represent	it	symbolically	and	manipulate	the	representing	
symbols	as	if	they	have	a	life	of	their	own,	without	necessarily	attending	to	
their	referents—and	the	ability	to	contextualize,	to	pause	as	needed	during	the	
manipulation	process	in	order	to	probe	into	the	referents	for	the	symbols	involved.	
Quantitative	reasoning	entails	habits	of	creating	a	coherent	representation	of	
the	problem	at	hand;	considering	the	units	involved;	attending	to	the	meaning	of	
quantities,	not	just	how	to	compute	them;	and	knowing	and	flexibly	using	different	
properties	of	operations	and	objects.
3   Construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others.
Mathematically	proficient	students	understand	and	use	stated	assumptions,	
definitions,	and	previously	established	results	in	constructing	arguments.	They	
make	conjectures	and	build	a	logical	progression	of	statements	to	explore	the	
truth	of	their	conjectures.	They	are	able	to	analyze	situations	by	breaking	them	into	
cases,	and	can	recognize	and	use	counterexamples.	They	justify	their	conclusions,	

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
StandardS for matHematICal praCtICe   |   7
communicate	them	to	others,	and	respond	to	the	arguments	of	others.	They	reason	
inductively	about	data,	making	plausible	arguments	that	take	into	account	the	
context	from	which	the	data	arose.	Mathematically	proficient	students	are	also	able	
to	compare	the	effectiveness	of	two	plausible	arguments,	distinguish	correct	logic	or	
reasoning	from	that	which	is	flawed,	and—if	there	is	a	flaw	in	an	argument—explain	
what	it	is.	Elementary	students	can	construct	arguments	using	concrete	referents	
such	as	objects,	drawings,	diagrams,	and	actions.	Such	arguments	can	make	sense	
and	be	correct,	even	though	they	are	not	generalized	or	made	formal	until	later	
grades.	Later,	students	learn	to	determine	domains	to	which	an	argument	applies.	
Students	at	all	grades	can	listen	or	read	the	arguments	of	others,	decide	whether	
they	make	sense,	and	ask	useful	questions	to	clarify	or	improve	the	arguments.
4   Model with mathematics.
Mathematically	proficient	students	can	apply	the	mathematics	they	know	to	solve	
problems	arising	in	everyday	life,	society ,	and	the	workplace.	In	early	grades,	this	might	
be	as	simple	as	writing	an	addition	equation	to	describe	a	situation.	In	middle	grades,	
a	student	might	apply	proportional	reasoning	to	plan	a	school	event	or	analyze	a	
problem	in	the	community .	By	high	school,	a	student	might	use	geometry	to	solve	a	
design	problem	or	use	a	function	to	describe	how	one	quantity	of	interest	depends	
on	another .	Mathematically	proficient	students	who	can	apply	what	they	know	are	
comfortable	making	assumptions	and	approximations	to	simplify	a	complicated	
situation,	realizing	that	these	may	need	revision	later .	They	are	able	to	identify	
important	quantities	in	a	practical	situation	and	map	their	relationships	using	such	
tools	as	diagrams,	two-way	tables,	graphs,	flowcharts	and	formulas.	They	can	analyze	
those	relationships	mathematically	to	draw	conclusions.	They	routinely	interpret	their	
mathematical	results	in	the	context	of	the	situation	and	reflect	on	whether	the	results	
make	sense,	possibly	improving	the	model	if	it	has	not	served	its	purpose.	
5   Use appropriate tools strategically.
Mathematically	proficient	students	consider	the	available	tools	when	solving	a	
mathematical	problem.	These	tools	might	include	pencil	and	paper,	concrete	
models,	a	ruler,	a	protractor,	a	calculator,	a	spreadsheet,	a	computer	algebra	system,	
a	statistical	package,	or	dynamic	geometry	software.	Proficient	students	are	
sufficiently	familiar	with	tools	appropriate	for	their	grade	or	course	to	make	sound	
decisions	about	when	each	of	these	tools	might	be	helpful,	recognizing	both	the	
insight	to	be	gained	and	their	limitations.	For	example,	mathematically	proficient	
high	school	students	analyze	graphs	of	functions	and	solutions	generated	using	a	
graphing	calculator.	They	detect	possible	errors	by	strategically	using	estimation	
and	other	mathematical	knowledge.	When	making	mathematical	models,	they	know	
that	technology	can	enable	them	to	visualize	the	results	of	varying	assumptions,	
explore	consequences,	and	compare	predictions	with	data.	Mathematically	
proficient	students	at	various	grade	levels	are	able	to	identify	relevant	external	
mathematical	resources,	such	as	digital	content	located	on	a	website,	and	use	them	
to	pose	or	solve	problems.	They	are	able	to	use	technological	tools	to	explore	and	
deepen	their	understanding	of	concepts.	
6   Attend to precision.
Mathematically	proficient	students	try	to	communicate	precisely	to	others.	They	
try	to	use	clear	definitions	in	discussion	with	others	and	in	their	own	reasoning.	
They	state	the	meaning	of	the	symbols	they	choose,	including	using	the	equal	sign	
consistently	and	appropriately.	They	are	careful	about	specifying	units	of	measure,	
and	labeling	axes	to	clarify	the	correspondence	with	quantities	in	a	problem.	They	
calculate	accurately	and	efficiently,	express	numerical	answers	with	a	degree	of	
precision	appropriate	for	the	problem	context.	In	the	elementary	grades,	students	
give	carefully	formulated	explanations	to	each	other.	By	the	time	they	reach	high	
school	they	have	learned	to	examine	claims	and	make	explicit	use	of	definitions.	

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
StandardS for matHematICal praCtICe   |   8
7   Look for and make use of structure.
Mathematically	proficient	students	look	closely	to	discern	a	pattern	or	structure.	
Y oung	students,	for	example,	might	notice	that	three	and	seven	more	is	the	same	
amount	as	seven	and	three	more,	or	they	may	sort	a	collection	of	shapes	according	
to	how	many	sides	the	shapes	have.	Later,	students	will	see	7	×	8	equals	the	
well	remembered	7	×	5	+	7	×	3,	in	preparation	for	learning	about	the	distributive	
property.	In	the	expression	x2	+	9x	+	14,	older	students	can	see	the	14	as	2	×	7	and	
the	9	as	2	+	7 .	They	recognize	the	significance	of	an	existing	line	in	a	geometric	
figure	and	can	use	the	strategy	of	drawing	an	auxiliary	line	for	solving	problems.	
They	also	can	step	back	for	an	overview	and	shift	perspective.	They	can	see	
complicated	things,	such	as	some	algebraic	expressions,	as	single	objects	or	as	
being	composed	of	several	objects.	For	example,	they	can	see	5	–	3(x	–	y)2	as	5	
minus	a	positive	number	times	a	square	and	use	that	to	realize	that	its	value	cannot	
be	more	than	5	for	any	real	numbers	x	and	y.	
8   Look for and express regularity in repeated reasoning.
Mathematically	proficient	students	notice	if	calculations	are	repeated,	and	look	
both	for	general	methods	and	for	shortcuts.	Upper	elementary	students	might	
notice	when	dividing	25	by	11	that	they	are	repeating	the	same	calculations	over	
and	over	again,	and	conclude	they	have	a	repeating	decimal.	By	paying	attention	
to	the	calculation	of	slope	as	they	repeatedly	check	whether	points	are	on	the	line	
through	(1,	2)	with	slope	3,	middle	school	students	might	abstract	the	equation	
(y	–	2)/(x	–	1)	=	3.	Noticing	the	regularity	in	the	way	terms	cancel	when	expanding	
(x	–	1)(x	+	1),	(x	–	1)(x2	+	x	+	1),	and	(x	–	1)(x3	+	x2	+	x	+	1)	might	lead	them	to	the	
general	formula	for	the	sum	of	a	geometric	series.	As	they	work	to	solve	a	problem,	
mathematically	proficient	students	maintain	oversight	of	the	process,	while	
attending	to	the	details.	They	continually	evaluate	the	reasonableness	of	their	
intermediate	results.
Connecting the Standards for Mathematical Practice to the Standards for 
Mathematical Content
The	Standards	for	Mathematical	Practice	describe	ways	in	which	developing	student	
practitioners	of	the	discipline	of	mathematics	increasingly	ought	to	engage	with	
the	subject	matter	as	they	grow	in	mathematical	maturity	and	expertise	throughout	
the	elementary,	middle	and	high	school	years.	Designers	of	curricula,	assessments,	
and	professional	development	should	all	attend	to	the	need	to	connect	the	
mathematical	practices	to	mathematical	content	in	mathematics	instruction.
The	Standards	for	Mathematical	Content	are	a	balanced	combination	of	procedure	
and	understanding.	Expectations	that	begin	with	the	word	“understand”	are	often	
especially	good	opportunities	to	connect	the	practices	to	the	content.	Students	
who	lack	understanding	of	a	topic	may	rely	on	procedures	too	heavily.	Without	
a	flexible	base	from	which	to	work,	they	may	be	less	likely	to	consider	analogous	
problems,	represent	problems	coherently,	justify	conclusions,	apply	the	mathematics	
to	practical	situations,	use	technology	mindfully	to	work	with	the	mathematics,	
explain	the	mathematics	accurately	to	other	students,	step	back	for	an	overview,	or	
deviate	from	a	known	procedure	to	find	a	shortcut.	In	short,	a	lack	of	understanding	
effectively	prevents	a	student	from	engaging	in	the	mathematical	practices.	
In	this	respect,	those	content	standards	which	set	an	expectation	of	understanding	
are	potential	“points	of	intersection”	between	the	Standards	for	Mathematical	
Content	and	the	Standards	for	Mathematical	Practice.	These	points	of	intersection	
are	intended	to	be	weighted	toward	central	and	generative	concepts	in	the	
school	mathematics	curriculum	that	most	merit	the	time,	resources,	innovative	
energies,	and	focus	necessary	to	qualitatively	improve	the	curriculum,	instruction,	
assessment,	professional	development,	and	student	achievement	in	mathematics.