Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
KInderGarten   |   9
mathematics | Kindergarten
In	Kindergarten,	instructional	time	should	focus	on	two	critical	areas:	(1)	
representing,	relating,	and	operating	on	whole	numbers,	initially	with	
sets	of	objects;	(2)	describing	shapes	and	space.	More	learning	time	in	
Kindergarten	should	be	devoted	to	number	than	to	other	topics.	
(1)	Students	use	numbers,	including	written	numerals,	to	represent	
quantities	and	to	solve	quantitative	problems,	such	as	counting	objects	in	
a	set;	counting	out	a	given	number	of	objects;	comparing	sets	or	numerals;	
and	modeling	simple	joining	and	separating	situations	with	sets	of	objects,	
or	eventually	with	equations	such	as	5	+	2	=	7	and	7	–	2	=	5.	(Kindergarten	
students	should	see	addition	and	subtraction	equations,	and	student	
writing	of	equations	in	kindergarten	is	encouraged,	but	it	is	not	required.)	
Students	choose,	combine,	and	apply	effective	strategies	for	answering	
quantitative	questions,	including	quickly	recognizing	the	cardinalities	of	
small	sets	of	objects,	counting	and	producing	sets	of	given	sizes,	counting	
the	number	of	objects	in	combined	sets,	or	counting	the	number	of	objects	
that	remain	in	a	set	after	some	are	taken	away.	
(2)	Students	describe	their	physical	world	using	geometric	ideas	(e.g.,	
shape,	orientation,	spatial	relations)	and	vocabulary.	They	identify,	name,	
and	describe	basic	two-dimensional	shapes,	such	as	squares,	triangles,	
circles,	rectangles,	and	hexagons,	presented	in	a	variety	of	ways	(e.g.,	with	
different	sizes	and	orientations),	as	well	as	three-dimensional	shapes	such	
as	cubes,	cones,	cylinders,	and	spheres.	They	use	basic	shapes	and	spatial	
reasoning	to	model	objects	in	their	environment	and	to	construct	more	
complex	shapes.	

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
KInderGarten   |   10
Counting and Cardinality
• Know number names and the count sequence.
• Count to tell the number of objects.
• Compare numbers.
operations and algebraic thinking
• Understand addition as putting together and 
adding to, and understand subtraction as 
taking apart and taking from.
number and operations in Base ten
• Work with numbers 11–19 to gain foundations 
for place value. 
measurement and data
• describe and compare measurable attributes.
• Classify objects and count the number of 
objects in categories.
Geometry
• Identify and describe shapes.
• analyze, compare, create, and compose 
shapes.
mathematical Practices 
1.	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.	 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.	 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.	 Model	with	mathematics.
5.	 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.	 Attend	to	precision.
7 .	 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.	 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
Grade K overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
KInderGarten   |   11
Counting and Cardinality K.CC
Know number names and the count sequence.
1.	 Count	to	100	by	ones	and	by	tens.	
2.	 Count	forward	beginning	from	a	given	number	within	the	known	
sequence	(instead	of	having	to	begin	at	1).
3.	 Write	numbers	from	0	to	20.	Represent	a	number	of	objects	with	a	
written	numeral	0-20	(with	0	representing	a	count	of	no	objects).
Count to tell the number of objects.  
4.	 Understand	the	relationship	between	numbers	and	quantities;	connect	
counting	to	cardinality.	
a.	 When	counting	objects,	say	the	number	names	in	the	standard	
order,	pairing	each	object	with	one	and	only	one	number	name	
and	each	number	name	with	one	and	only	one	object.
b.	 Understand	that	the	last	number	name	said	tells	the	number	of	
objects	counted.	The	number	of	objects	is	the	same	regardless	of	
their	arrangement	or	the	order	in	which	they	were	counted.
c.	 Understand	that	each	successive	number	name	refers	to	a	quantity	
that	is	one	larger.	
5.	 Count	to	answer	“how	many?”	questions	about	as	many	as	20	things	
arranged	in	a	line,	a	rectangular	array,	or	a	circle,	or	as	many	as	10	
things	in	a	scattered	configuration;	given	a	number	from	1–20,	count	
out	that	many	objects.
Compare numbers.
6.	 Identify	whether	the	number	of	objects	in	one	group	is	greater	than,	
less	than,	or	equal	to	the	number	of	objects	in	another	group,	e.g.,	by	
using	matching	and	counting	strategies.1
7 .	 Compare	two	numbers	between	1	and	10	presented	as	written	
numerals.
operations and algebraic thinking K.oa
Understand addition as putting together and adding to, and under-
stand subtraction as taking apart and taking from.
1.	 Represent	addition	and	subtraction	with	objects,	fingers,	mental	
images,	drawings2,	sounds	(e.g.,	claps),	acting	out	situations,	verbal	
explanations,	expressions,	or	equations.
2.	 Solve	addition	and	subtraction	word	problems,	and	add	and	subtract	
within	10,	e.g.,	by	using	objects	or	drawings	to	represent	the	problem.
3.	 Decompose	numbers	less	than	or	equal	to	10	into	pairs	in	more	
than	one	way,	e.g.,	by	using	objects	or	drawings,	and	record	each	
decomposition	by	a	drawing	or	equation	(e.g.,	5	=	2	+	3	and	5	=	4	+	1).	
4.	 For	any	number	from	1	to	9,	find	the	number	that	makes	10	when	
added	to	the	given	number,	e.g.,	by	using	objects	or	drawings,	and	
record	the	answer	with	a	drawing	or	equation.
5.	 Fluently	add	and	subtract	within	5.
1Include	groups	with	up	to	ten	objects.
2Drawings	need	not	show	details,	but	should	show	the	mathematics	in	the	problem.	
(This	applies	wherever	drawings	are	mentioned	in	the	Standards.)

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
KInderGarten   |   12
number and operations in Base ten K.nBt
Work with numbers 11–19 to gain foundations for place value. 
1.	 Compose	and	decompose	numbers	from	11	to	19	into	ten	ones	and	
some	further	ones,	e.g.,	by	using	objects	or	drawings,	and	record	each	
composition	or	decomposition	by	a	drawing	or	equation	(e.g.,	18	=	10	+	
8);	understand	that	these	numbers	are	composed	of	ten	ones	and	one,	
two,	three,	four,	five,	six,	seven,	eight,	or	nine	ones.	
measurement and data K.md
Describe and compare measurable attributes.
1.	 Describe	measurable	attributes	of	objects,	such	as	length	or	weight.	
Describe	several	measurable	attributes	of	a	single	object.
2.	 Directly	compare	two	objects	with	a	measurable	attribute	in	common,	
to	see	which	object	has	“more	of”/“less	of”	the	attribute,	and	describe	
the	difference.	For example, directly compare the heights of two 
children and describe one child as taller/shorter.
Classify objects and count the number of objects in each category.
3.	 Classify	objects	into	given	categories;	count	the	numbers	of	objects	in	
each	category	and	sort	the	categories	by	count.3
Geometry K.G
Identify and describe shapes (squares, circles, triangles, rectangles, 
hexagons, cubes, cones, cylinders, and spheres).
1.	 Describe	objects	in	the	environment	using	names	of	shapes,	and	
describe	the	relative	positions	of	these	objects	using	terms	such	as	
above,	below,	beside,	in front of,	behind,	and	next to.
2.	 Correctly	name	shapes	regardless	of	their	orientations	or	overall	size.
3.	 Identify	shapes	as	two-dimensional	(lying	in	a	plane,	“flat”)	or	three-
dimensional	(“solid”).
Analyze, compare, create, and compose shapes.
4.	 Analyze	and	compare	two-	and	three-dimensional	shapes,	in	
different	sizes	and	orientations,	using	informal	language	to	describe	
their	similarities,	differences,	parts	(e.g.,	number	of	sides	and	
vertices/“corners”)	and	other	attributes	(e.g.,	having	sides	of	equal	
length).
5.	 Model	shapes	in	the	world	by	building	shapes	from	components	(e.g.,	
sticks	and	clay	balls)	and	drawing	shapes.
6.	 Compose	simple	shapes	to	form	larger	shapes.	For example, “Can you 
join these two triangles with full sides touching to make a rectangle?”
3Limit	category	counts	to	be	less	than	or	equal	to	10.