Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 2   |   17
mathematics | Grade 2
In	Grade	2,	instructional	time	should	focus	on	four	critical	areas:	(1)	
extending	understanding	of	base-ten	notation;	(2)	building	fluency	with	
addition	and	subtraction;	(3)	using	standard	units	of	measure;	and	(4)	
describing	and	analyzing	shapes.
(1)	Students	extend	their	understanding	of	the	base-ten	system.	This	
includes	ideas	of	counting	in	fives,	tens,	and	multiples	of	hundreds,	tens,	
and	ones,	as	well	as	number	relationships	involving	these	units,	including	
comparing.	Students	understand	multi-digit	numbers	(up	to	1000)	written	
in	base-ten	notation,	recognizing	that	the	digits	in	each	place	represent	
amounts	of	thousands,	hundreds,	tens,	or	ones	(e.g.,	853	is	8	hundreds	+	5	
tens	+	3	ones).	
(2)	Students	use	their	understanding	of	addition	to	develop	fluency	with	
addition	and	subtraction	within	100.	They	solve	problems	within	1000	
by	applying	their	understanding	of	models	for	addition	and	subtraction,	
and	they	develop,	discuss,	and	use	efficient,	accurate,	and	generalizable	
methods	to	compute	sums	and	differences	of	whole	numbers	in	base-ten	
notation,	using	their	understanding	of	place	value	and	the	properties	of	
operations.	They	select	and	accurately	apply	methods	that	are	appropriate	
for	the	context	and	the	numbers	involved	to	mentally	calculate	sums	and	
differences	for	numbers	with	only	tens	or	only	hundreds.	
(3)	Students	recognize	the	need	for	standard	units	of	measure	(centimeter	
and	inch)	and	they	use	rulers	and	other	measurement	tools	with	the	
understanding	that	linear	measure	involves	an	iteration	of	units.	They	
recognize	that	the	smaller	the	unit,	the	more	iterations	they	need	to	cover	a	
given	length.	
(4)	Students	describe	and	analyze	shapes	by	examining	their	sides	and	
angles.	Students	investigate,	describe,	and	reason	about	decomposing	
and	combining	shapes	to	make	other	shapes.	Through	building,	drawing,	
and	analyzing	two-	and	three-dimensional	shapes,	students	develop	a	
foundation	for	understanding	area,	volume,	congruence,	similarity,	and	
symmetry	in	later	grades.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 2   |   18
operations and algebraic thinking
• represent and solve problems involving 
addition and subtraction.
• add and subtract within 20.
• Work with equal groups of objects to gain 
foundations for multiplication.
number and operations in Base ten
• Understand place value.
• Use place value understanding and 
properties of operations to add and subtract.
measurement and data
• measure and estimate lengths in standard 
units.
• relate addition and subtraction to length.
• Work with time and money.
• represent and interpret data.
Geometry
• reason with shapes and their attributes.
mathematical Practices 
1.	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.	 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.	 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.	 Model	with	mathematics.
5.	 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.	 Attend	to	precision.
7 .	 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.	 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
Grade 2 overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 2   |   19
operations and algebraic thinking  2.oa
Represent and solve problems involving addition and subtraction.
1.	 Use	addition	and	subtraction	within	100	to	solve	one-	and	two-step	
word	problems	involving	situations	of	adding	to,	taking	from,	putting	
together,	taking	apart,	and	comparing,	with	unknowns	in	all	positions, 
e.g.,	by	using	drawings	and	equations	with	a	symbol	for	the	unknown	
number	to	represent	the	problem.1
Add and subtract within 20.
2.	 Fluently	add	and	subtract	within	20	using	mental	strategies.2	By	end	of	
Grade	2,	know	from	memory	all	sums	of	two	one-digit	numbers.	
Work with equal groups of objects to gain foundations for 
multiplication.
3.	 Determine	whether	a	group	of	objects	(up	to	20)	has	an	odd	or	even	
number	of	members,	e.g.,	by	pairing	objects	or	counting	them	by	2s;	
write	an	equation	to	express	an	even	number	as	a	sum	of	two	equal	
addends.
4.	 Use	addition	to	find	the	total	number	of	objects	arranged	in	
rectangular	arrays	with	up	to	5	rows	and	up	to	5	columns;	write	an	
equation	to	express	the	total	as	a	sum	of	equal	addends.
number and operations in Base ten  2.nBt
Understand place value. 
1.	 Understand	that	the	three	digits	of	a	three-digit	number	represent	
amounts	of	hundreds,	tens,	and	ones;	e.g.,	706	equals	7	hundreds,	0	
tens,	and	6	ones.	Understand	the	following	as	special	cases:
a.	 100	can	be	thought	of	as	a	bundle	of	ten	tens	—	called	a	
“hundred.”
b.	 The	numbers	100,	200,	300,	400,	500,	600,	700,	800,	900	refer	to	
one,	two,	three,	four,	five,	six,	seven,	eight,	or	nine	hundreds	(and	0	
tens	and	0	ones).
2.	 Count	within	1000;	skip-count	by	5s,	10s,	and	100s.
3.	 Read	and	write	numbers	to	1000	using	base-ten	numerals,	number	
names,	and	expanded	form.
4.	 Compare	two	three-digit	numbers	based	on	meanings	of	the	hundreds,	
tens,	and	ones	digits,	using	>,	=,	and	<	symbols	to	record	the	results	of	
comparisons.
Use place value understanding and properties of operations to add 
and subtract.
5.	 Fluently	add	and	subtract	within	100	using	strategies	based	on	place	
value,	properties	of	operations,	and/or	the	relationship	between	
addition	and	subtraction.	
6.	 Add	up	to	four	two-digit	numbers	using	strategies	based	on	place	
value	and	properties	of	operations.
7 .	 Add	and	subtract	within	1000,	using	concrete	models	or	drawings	
and	strategies	based	on	place	value,	properties	of	operations,	and/or	
the	relationship	between	addition	and	subtraction;	relate	the	strategy	
to	a	written	method.	Understand	that	in	adding	or	subtracting	three-
digit	numbers,	one	adds	or	subtracts	hundreds	and	hundreds,	tens	
and	tens,	ones	and	ones;	and	sometimes	it	is	necessary	to	compose	or	
decompose	tens	or	hundreds.
8.	 Mentally	add	10	or	100	to	a	given	number	100–900,	and	mentally	
subtract	10	or	100	from	a	given	number	100–900.
9.	 Explain	why	addition	and	subtraction	strategies	work,	using	place	value	
and	the	properties	of	operations.3	
1See	Glossary,	T able	1.
2See	standard	1.OA.6	for	a	list	of	mental	strategies.
3Explanations	may	be	supported	by	drawings	or	objects.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 2   |   20
measurement and data  2.md
Measure and estimate lengths in standard units.
1.	 Measure	the	length	of	an	object	by	selecting	and	using	appropriate	
tools	such	as	rulers,	yardsticks,	meter	sticks,	and	measuring	tapes.	
2.	 Measure	the	length	of	an	object	twice,	using	length	units	of	
different	lengths	for	the	two	measurements;	describe	how	the	two	
measurements	relate	to	the	size	of	the	unit	chosen.	
3.	 Estimate	lengths	using	units	of	inches,	feet,	centimeters,	and	meters.
4.	 Measure	to	determine	how	much	longer	one	object	is	than	another,	
expressing	the	length	difference	in	terms	of	a	standard	length	unit.
Relate addition and subtraction to length.
5.	 Use	addition	and	subtraction	within	100	to	solve	word	problems	
involving	lengths	that	are	given	in	the	same	units,	e.g.,	by	using	
drawings	(such	as	drawings	of	rulers)	and	equations	with	a	symbol	for	
the	unknown	number	to	represent	the	problem.
6.	 Represent	whole	numbers	as	lengths	from	0	on	a	number	line	diagram	
with	equally	spaced	points	corresponding	to	the	numbers	0,	1,	2,	...,	and	
represent	whole-number	sums	and	differences	within	100	on	a	number	
line	diagram.	
Work with time and money.
7 .	 T ell	and	write	time	from	analog	and	digital	clocks	to	the	nearest	five	
minutes,	using	a.m.	and	p.m.	
8.	 Solve	word	problems	involving	dollar	bills,	quarters,	dimes,	nickels,	and	
pennies,	using	$	and	¢	symbols	appropriately.	Example: If you have 2 
dimes and 3 pennies, how many cents do you have?	
Represent and interpret data.
9.	 Generate	measurement	data	by	measuring	lengths	of	several	objects	
to	the	nearest	whole	unit,	or	by	making	repeated	measurements	of	the	
same	object.	Show	the	measurements	by	making	a	line	plot,	where	the	
horizontal	scale	is	marked	off	in	whole-number	units.
10.	 Draw	a	picture	graph	and	a	bar	graph	(with	single-unit	scale)	to	
represent	a	data	set	with	up	to	four	categories.	Solve	simple	put-
together,	take-apart,	and	compare	problems4	using	information	
presented	in	a	bar	graph.	
Geometry  2.G
Reason with shapes and their attributes.
1.	 Recognize	and	draw	shapes	having	specified	attributes,	such	as	a	given	
number	of	angles	or	a	given	number	of	equal	faces.5	Identify	triangles,	
quadrilaterals,	pentagons,	hexagons,	and	cubes.	
2.	 Partition	a	rectangle	into	rows	and	columns	of	same-size	squares	and	
count	to	find	the	total	number	of	them.	
3.	 Partition	circles	and	rectangles	into	two,	three,	or	four	equal	shares,	
describe	the	shares	using	the	words	halves,	thirds,	half of,	a third of,	
etc.,	and	describe	the	whole	as	two	halves,	three	thirds,	four	fourths.	
Recognize	that	equal	shares	of	identical	wholes	need	not	have	the	
same	shape.
4See	Glossary,	T able	1.
5Sizes	are	compared	directly	or	visually,	not	compared	by	measuring.