Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 7   |   46
mathematics | Grade 7
In	Grade	7 ,	instructional	time	should	focus	on	four	critical	areas:	(1)	
developing	understanding	of	and	applying	proportional	relationships;	
(2)	developing	understanding	of	operations	with	rational	numbers	and	
working	with	expressions	and	linear	equations;	(3)	solving	problems	
involving	scale	drawings	and	informal	geometric	constructions,	and	
working	with	two-	and	three-dimensional	shapes	to	solve	problems	
involving	area,	surface	area,	and	volume;	and	(4)	drawing	inferences	about	
populations	based	on	samples.
(1)	Students	extend	their	understanding	of	ratios	and	develop	
understanding	of	proportionality	to	solve	single-	and	multi-step	problems.	
Students	use	their	understanding	of	ratios	and	proportionality	to	solve	
a	wide	variety	of	percent	problems,	including	those	involving	discounts,	
interest,	taxes,	tips,	and	percent	increase	or	decrease.	Students	solve	
problems	about	scale	drawings	by	relating	corresponding	lengths	between	
the	objects	or	by	using	the	fact	that	relationships	of	lengths	within	an	
object	are	preserved	in	similar	objects.	Students	graph	proportional	
relationships	and	understand	the	unit	rate	informally	as	a	measure	of	the	
steepness	of	the	related	line,	called	the	slope.	They	distinguish	proportional	
relationships	from	other	relationships.
(2)	Students	develop	a	unified	understanding	of	number,	recognizing	
fractions,	decimals	(that	have	a	finite	or	a	repeating	decimal	
representation),	and	percents	as	different	representations	of	rational	
numbers.	Students	extend	addition,	subtraction,	multiplication,	and	division	
to	all	rational	numbers,	maintaining	the	properties	of	operations	and	the	
relationships	between	addition	and	subtraction,	and	multiplication	and	
division.	By	applying	these	properties,	and	by	viewing	negative	numbers	
in	terms	of	everyday	contexts	(e.g.,	amounts	owed	or	temperatures	below	
zero),	students	explain	and	interpret	the	rules	for	adding,	subtracting,	
multiplying,	and	dividing	with	negative	numbers.	They	use	the	arithmetic	
of	rational	numbers	as	they	formulate	expressions	and	equations	in	one	
variable	and	use	these	equations	to	solve	problems.	
(3)	Students	continue	their	work	with	area	from	Grade	6,	solving	problems	
involving	the	area	and	circumference	of	a	circle	and	surface	area	of	three-
dimensional	objects.	In	preparation	for	work	on	congruence	and	similarity	
in	Grade	8	they	reason	about	relationships	among	two-dimensional	figures	
using	scale	drawings	and	informal	geometric	constructions,	and	they	gain	
familiarity	with	the	relationships	between	angles	formed	by	intersecting	
lines.	Students	work	with	three-dimensional	figures,	relating	them	to	two-
dimensional	figures	by	examining	cross-sections.	They	solve	real-world	
and	mathematical	problems	involving	area,	surface	area,	and	volume	of	
two-	and	three-dimensional	objects	composed	of	triangles,	quadrilaterals,	
polygons,	cubes	and	right	prisms.
	(4)	Students	build	on	their	previous	work	with	single	data	distributions	to	
compare	two	data	distributions	and	address	questions	about	differences	
between	populations.	They	begin	informal	work	with	random	sampling	
to	generate	data	sets	and	learn	about	the	importance	of	representative	
samples	for	drawing	inferences.	

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 7   |   47
ratios and Proportional relationships
• analyze proportional relationships and use 
them to solve real-world and mathematical 
problems.
the number System
• apply and extend previous understandings 
of operations with fractions to add, subtract, 
multiply, and divide rational numbers.
expressions and equations
• Use properties of operations to generate 
equivalent expressions.
• Solve real-life and mathematical problems 
using numerical and algebraic expressions and 
equations.
Geometry
• draw, construct and describe geometrical 
figures and describe the relationships between 
them.
• Solve real-life and mathematical problems 
involving angle measure, area, surface area, 
and volume.
Statistics and Probability
• Use random sampling to draw inferences about 
a population.
• draw informal comparative inferences about 
two populations.
• Investigate chance processes and develop, use, 
and evaluate probability models.
mathematical Practices 
1.	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.	 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.	 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.	 Model	with	mathematics.
5.	 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.	 Attend	to	precision.
7 .	 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.	 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
Grade 7 overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 7   |   48
ratios and Proportional relationships  7 .rP
Analyze proportional relationships and use them to solve real-world 
and mathematical problems.
1.	 Compute	unit	rates	associated	with	ratios	of	fractions,	including	ratios	
of	lengths,	areas	and	other	quantities	measured	in	like	or	different	
units.	For example, if a person walks 1/2 mile in each 1/ 4 hour, compute 
the unit rate as the complex fraction 1/2/1/ 4 miles per hour, equivalently 2 
miles per hour.
2.	 Recognize	and	represent	proportional	relationships	between	
quantities.
a.	 Decide	whether	two	quantities	are	in	a	proportional	relationship,	
e.g.,	by	testing	for	equivalent	ratios	in	a	table	or	graphing	on	a	
coordinate	plane	and	observing	whether	the	graph	is	a	straight	
line	through	the	origin.
b.	 Identify	the	constant	of	proportionality	(unit	rate)	in	tables,	
graphs,	equations,	diagrams,	and	verbal	descriptions	of	
proportional	relationships.	
c.	 Represent	proportional	relationships	by	equations.	For example, if 
total cost t is proportional to the number n of items purchased at 
a constant price p, the relationship between the total cost and the 
number of items can be expressed as t = pn.	
d.	 Explain	what	a	point (x, y) on	the	graph	of	a	proportional	
relationship	means	in	terms	of	the	situation,	with	special	attention	
to	the	points	(0,	0)	and	(1, r) where r is	the	unit	rate.
3.	 Use	proportional	relationships	to	solve	multistep	ratio	and	percent	
problems.	Examples: simple interest, tax, markups and markdowns, 
gratuities and commissions, fees, percent increase and decrease, percent 
error.
the number System  7 .nS
Apply and extend previous understandings of operations with 
fractions to add, subtract, multiply, and divide rational numbers.
1.	 Apply	and	extend	previous	understandings	of	addition	and	subtraction	
to	add	and	subtract	rational	numbers;	represent	addition	and	
subtraction	on	a	horizontal	or	vertical	number	line	diagram.
a.	 Describe	situations	in	which	opposite	quantities	combine	to	
make	0.	For example, a hydrogen atom has 0 charge because its two 
constituents are oppositely charged. 
b.	 Understand	p	+	q	as	the	number	located	a	distance	|q|	from	p,	
in	the	positive	or	negative	direction	depending	on	whether	q	is	
positive	or	negative.	Show	that	a	number	and	its	opposite	have	
a	sum	of	0	(are	additive	inverses).	Interpret	sums	of	rational	
numbers	by	describing	real-world	contexts.
c.	 Understand	subtraction	of	rational	numbers	as	adding	the	
additive	inverse,	p	–	q	=	p	+	(–q).	Show	that	the	distance	between	
two	rational	numbers	on	the	number	line	is	the	absolute	value	of	
their	difference,	and	apply	this	principle	in	real-world	contexts.
d.	 Apply	properties	of	operations	as	strategies	to	add	and	subtract	
rational	numbers.	
2.	 Apply	and	extend	previous	understandings	of	multiplication	and	
division	and	of	fractions	to	multiply	and	divide	rational	numbers.	
a.	 Understand	that	multiplication	is	extended	from	fractions	to	
rational	numbers	by	requiring	that	operations	continue	to	
satisfy	the	properties	of	operations,	particularly	the	distributive	
property,	leading	to	products	such	as	(–1)(–1)	=	1	and	the	rules	
for	multiplying	signed	numbers.	Interpret	products	of	rational	
numbers	by	describing	real-world	contexts.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 7   |   49
b.	 Understand	that	integers	can	be	divided,	provided	that	the	divisor	
is	not	zero,	and	every	quotient	of	integers	(with	non-zero	divisor)	
is	a	rational	number.	If	p	and	q	are	integers,	then	–(p/q)	=	(–p)/q	=	
p/(–q).	Interpret	quotients	of	rational	numbers	by	describing	real-
world	contexts.
c.	 Apply	properties	of	operations	as	strategies	to	multiply	and	
divide	rational	numbers.
d.	 Convert	a	rational	number	to	a	decimal	using	long	division;	know	
that	the	decimal	form	of	a	rational	number	terminates	in	0s	or	
eventually	repeats.
3.	 Solve	real-world	and	mathematical	problems	involving	the	four	
operations	with	rational	numbers.1
expressions and equations  7 .ee
Use properties of operations to generate equivalent expressions.
1.	 Apply	properties	of	operations	as	strategies	to	add,	subtract,	factor,	
and	expand	linear	expressions	with	rational	coefficients.
2.	 Understand	that	rewriting	an	expression	in	different	forms	in	a	
problem	context	can	shed	light	on	the	problem	and	how	the	quantities	
in	it	are	related.	For example, a + 0.05a = 1.05a means that “increase by 
5%” is the same as “multiply by 1.05.”
Solve real-life and mathematical problems using numerical and 
algebraic expressions and equations.
3.	 Solve	multi-step	real-life	and	mathematical	problems	posed	with	
positive	and	negative	rational	numbers	in	any	form	(whole	numbers,	
fractions,	and	decimals),	using	tools	strategically.	Apply	properties	of	
operations	to	calculate	with	numbers	in	any	form;	convert	between	
forms	as	appropriate;	and	assess	the	reasonableness	of	answers	using	
mental	computation	and	estimation	strategies.	For example: If a woman 
making $25 an hour gets a 10% raise, she will make an additional 1/10 of 
her salary an hour, or $2.50, for a new salary of $27.50. If you want to place 
a towel bar 9 3/ 4 inches long in the center of a door that is 27 1/2 inches 
wide, you will need to place the bar about 9 inches from each edge; this 
estimate can be used as a check on the exact computation.
4.	 Use	variables	to	represent	quantities	in	a	real-world	or	mathematical	
problem,	and	construct	simple	equations	and	inequalities	to	solve	
problems	by	reasoning	about	the	quantities.
a.	 Solve	word	problems	leading	to	equations	of	the	form	px	+	q	=	r	
and	p(x	+	q)	=	r,	where	p,	q,	and	r	are	specific	rational	numbers.	
Solve	equations	of	these	forms	fluently.	Compare	an	algebraic	
solution	to	an	arithmetic	solution,	identifying	the	sequence	of	the	
operations	used	in	each	approach.	For example, the perimeter of a 
rectangle is 54 cm. Its length is 6 cm. What is its width?
b.	 Solve	word	problems	leading	to	inequalities	of	the	form	px	+	q	>	r	
or	px	+	q	<	r,	where	p,	q,	and	r	are	specific	rational	numbers.	Graph	
the	solution	set	of	the	inequality	and	interpret	it	in	the	context	of	
the	problem.	For example: As a salesperson, you are paid $50 per 
week plus $3 per sale. This week you want your pay to be at least 
$100. Write an inequality for the number of sales you need to make, 
and describe the solutions.
Geometry  7 .G
Draw, construct, and describe geometrical figures and describe the 
relationships between them.
1.	 Solve	problems	involving	scale	drawings	of	geometric	figures,	
including	computing	actual	lengths	and	areas	from	a	scale	drawing	
and	reproducing	a	scale	drawing	at	a	different	scale.
1Computations	with	rational	numbers	extend	the	rules	for	manipulating	fractions	to	
complex	fractions.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 7   |   50
2.	 Draw	(freehand,	with	ruler	and	protractor,	and	with	technology)	
geometric	shapes	with	given	conditions.	Focus	on	constructing	
triangles	from	three	measures	of	angles	or	sides,	noticing	when	the	
conditions	determine	a	unique	triangle,	more	than	one	triangle,	or	no	
triangle.	
3.	 Describe	the	two-dimensional	figures	that	result	from	slicing	three-
dimensional	figures,	as	in	plane	sections	of	right	rectangular	prisms	
and	right	rectangular	pyramids.	
Solve real-life and mathematical problems involving angle measure, 
area, surface area, and volume.
4.	 Know	the	formulas	for	the	area	and	circumference	of	a	circle	and	use	
them	to	solve	problems;	give	an	informal	derivation	of	the	relationship	
between	the	circumference	and	area	of	a	circle.
5.	 Use	facts	about	supplementary,	complementary,	vertical,	and	adjacent	
angles	in	a	multi-step	problem	to	write	and	solve	simple	equations	for	
an	unknown	angle	in	a	figure.	
6.	 Solve	real-world	and	mathematical	problems	involving	area,	volume	
and	surface	area	of	two-	and	three-dimensional	objects	composed	of	
triangles,	quadrilaterals,	polygons,	cubes,	and	right	prisms.	
Statistics and Probability   7 .SP
Use random sampling to draw inferences about a population.
1.	 Understand	that	statistics	can	be	used	to	gain	information	about	a	
population	by	examining	a	sample	of	the	population;	generalizations	
about	a	population	from	a	sample	are	valid	only	if	the	sample	is	
representative	of	that	population.	Understand	that	random	sampling	
tends	to	produce	representative	samples	and	support	valid	inferences.
2.	 Use	data	from	a	random	sample	to	draw	inferences	about	a	population	
with	an	unknown	characteristic	of	interest.	Generate	multiple	samples	
(or	simulated	samples)	of	the	same	size	to	gauge	the	variation	in	
estimates	or	predictions.	For example, estimate the mean word length in 
a book by randomly sampling words from the book; predict the winner of 
a school election based on randomly sampled survey data. Gauge how far 
off the estimate or prediction might be.
Draw informal comparative inferences about two populations.
3.	 Informally	assess	the	degree	of	visual	overlap	of	two	numerical	
data	distributions	with	similar	variabilities,	measuring	the	difference	
between	the	centers	by	expressing	it	as	a	multiple	of	a	measure	of	
variability.	For example, the mean height of players on the basketball 
team is 10 cm greater than the mean height of players on the soccer team, 
about twice the variability (mean absolute deviation) on either team; on 
a dot plot, the separation between the two distributions of heights is 
noticeable.
4.	 Use	measures	of	center	and	measures	of	variability	for	numerical	data	
from	random	samples	to	draw	informal	comparative	inferences	about	
two	populations.	For example, decide whether the words in a chapter 
of a seventh-grade science book are generally longer than the words in a 
chapter of a fourth-grade science book.
Investigate chance processes and develop, use, and evaluate 
probability models.
5.	 Understand	that	the	probability	of	a	chance	event	is	a	number	
between	0	and	1	that	expresses	the	likelihood	of	the	event	occurring.	
Larger	numbers	indicate	greater	likelihood.	A	probability	near	0	
indicates	an	unlikely	event,	a	probability	around	1/2	indicates	an	event	
that	is	neither	unlikely	nor	likely,	and	a	probability	near	1	indicates	a	
likely	event.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 7   |   51
6.	 Approximate	the	probability	of	a	chance	event	by	collecting	data	on	
the	chance	process	that	produces	it	and	observing	its	long-run	relative	
frequency,	and	predict	the	approximate	relative	frequency	given	the	
probability.	For example, when rolling a number cube 600 times, predict 
that a 3 or 6 would be rolled roughly 200 times, but probably not exactly 
200 times.
7 .	 Develop	a	probability	model	and	use	it	to	find	probabilities	of	events.	
Compare	probabilities	from	a	model	to	observed	frequencies;	if	the	
agreement	is	not	good,	explain	possible	sources	of	the	discrepancy.	
a.	 Develop	a	uniform	probability	model	by	assigning	equal	
probability	to	all	outcomes,	and	use	the	model	to	determine	
probabilities	of	events.	For example, if a student is selected at 
random from a class, find the probability that Jane will be selected 
and the probability that a girl will be selected.
b.	 Develop	a	probability	model	(which	may	not	be	uniform)	by	
observing	frequencies	in	data	generated	from	a	chance	process.	
For example, find the approximate probability that a spinning penny 
will land heads up or that a tossed paper cup will land open-end 
down. Do the outcomes for the spinning penny appear to be equally 
likely based on the observed frequencies?
8.	 Find	probabilities	of	compound	events	using	organized	lists,	tables,	
tree	diagrams,	and	simulation.
a.	 Understand	that,	just	as	with	simple	events,	the	probability	of	a	
compound	event	is	the	fraction	of	outcomes	in	the	sample	space	
for	which	the	compound	event	occurs.
b.	 Represent	sample	spaces	for	compound	events	using	methods	
such	as	organized	lists,	tables	and	tree	diagrams.	For	an	event	
described	in	everyday	language	(e.g.,	“rolling	double	sixes”),	
identify	the	outcomes	in	the	sample	space	which	compose	the	
event.
c.	 Design	and	use	a	simulation	to	generate	frequencies	for	
compound	events.	For example, use random digits as a simulation 
tool to approximate the answer to the question: If 40% of donors 
have type A blood, what is the probability that it will take at least 4 
donors to find one with type A blood?