Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 8   |   52
mathematics | Grade 8
In	Grade	8,	instructional	time	should	focus	on	three	critical	areas:	(1)	formulating	
and	reasoning	about	expressions	and	equations,	including	modeling	an	association	
in	bivariate	data	with	a	linear	equation,	and	solving	linear	equations	and	systems	
of	linear	equations;	(2)	grasping	the	concept	of	a	function	and	using	functions	
to	describe	quantitative	relationships;	(3)	analyzing	two-	and	three-dimensional	
space	and	figures	using	distance,	angle,	similarity,	and	congruence,	and	
understanding	and	applying	the	Pythagorean	Theorem.	
(1)	Students	use	linear	equations	and	systems	of	linear	equations	to	represent,	
analyze,	and	solve	a	variety	of	problems.	Students	recognize	equations	for	
proportions	(y/x	=	m	or	y	=	mx)	as	special	linear	equations	(y	=	mx	+	b),	
understanding	that	the	constant	of	proportionality	(m)	is	the	slope,	and	the	graphs	
are	lines	through	the	origin.	They	understand	that	the	slope	(m)	of	a	line	is	a	
constant	rate	of	change,	so	that	if	the	input	or	x-coordinate	changes	by	an	amount	
A,	the	output	or	y-coordinate	changes	by	the	amount	m·A.	Students	also	use	a	linear	
equation	to	describe	the	association	between	two	quantities	in	bivariate	data	(such	
as	arm	span	vs.	height	for	students	in	a	classroom).	At	this	grade,	fitting	the	model,	
and	assessing	its	fit	to	the	data	are	done	informally.	Interpreting	the	model	in	the	
context	of	the	data	requires	students	to	express	a	relationship	between	the	two	
quantities	in	question	and	to	interpret	components	of	the	relationship	(such	as	slope	
and	y-intercept)	in	terms	of	the	situation.
Students	strategically	choose	and	efficiently	implement	procedures	to	solve	linear	
equations	in	one	variable,	understanding	that	when	they	use	the	properties	of	
equality	and	the	concept	of	logical	equivalence,	they	maintain	the	solutions	of	the	
original	equation.	Students	solve	systems	of	two	linear	equations	in	two	variables	
and	relate	the	systems	to	pairs	of	lines	in	the	plane;	these	intersect,	are	parallel,	or	
are	the	same	line.	Students	use	linear	equations,	systems	of	linear	equations,	linear	
functions,	and	their	understanding	of	slope	of	a	line	to	analyze	situations	and	solve	
problems.
(2)	Students	grasp	the	concept	of	a	function	as	a	rule	that	assigns	to	each	input	
exactly	one	output.	They	understand	that	functions	describe	situations	where	one	
quantity	determines	another.	They	can	translate	among	representations	and	partial	
representations	of	functions	(noting	that	tabular	and	graphical	representations	
may	be	partial	representations),	and	they	describe	how	aspects	of	the	function	are	
reflected	in	the	different	representations.
(3)	Students	use	ideas	about	distance	and	angles,	how	they	behave	under	
translations,	rotations,	reflections,	and	dilations,	and	ideas	about	congruence	and	
similarity	to	describe	and	analyze	two-dimensional	figures	and	to	solve	problems.	
Students	show	that	the	sum	of	the	angles	in	a	triangle	is	the	angle	formed	by	a	
straight	line,	and	that	various	configurations	of	lines	give	rise	to	similar	triangles	
because	of	the	angles	created	when	a	transversal	cuts	parallel	lines.	Students	
understand	the	statement	of	the	Pythagorean	Theorem	and	its	converse,	and	can	
explain	why	the	Pythagorean	Theorem	holds,	for	example,	by	decomposing	a	
square	in	two	different	ways.	They	apply	the	Pythagorean	Theorem	to	find	distances	
between	points	on	the	coordinate	plane,	to	find	lengths,	and	to	analyze	polygons.	
Students	complete	their	work	on	volume	by	solving	problems	involving	cones,	
cylinders,	and	spheres.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 8   |   53
the number System
• Know that there are numbers that are not 
rational, and approximate them by rational 
numbers.
expressions and equations
• Work with radicals and integer exponents.
• Understand the connections between 
proportional relationships, lines, and linear 
equations.
• analyze and solve linear equations and pairs of 
simultaneous linear equations.
functions
• define, evaluate, and compare functions.
• Use functions to model relationships between 
quantities.
Geometry
• Understand congruence and similarity using 
physical models, transparencies, or geometry 
software.
• Understand and apply the Pythagorean 
theorem.
• Solve real-world and mathematical problems 
involving volume of cylinders, cones and 
spheres.
Statistics and Probability
• Investigate patterns of association in bivariate 
data.
mathematical Practices 
1.	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.	 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.	 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.	 Model	with	mathematics.
5.	 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.	 Attend	to	precision.
7 .	 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.	 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
Grade 8 overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 8   |   54
the number System  8.nS
Know that there are numbers that are not rational, and approximate 
them by rational numbers.
1.	 Know	that	numbers	that	are	not	rational	are	called	irrational.	
Understand	informally	that	every	number	has	a	decimal	expansion;	for	
rational	numbers	show	that	the	decimal	expansion	repeats	eventually,	
and	convert	a	decimal	expansion	which	repeats	eventually	into	a	
rational	number.
2.	 Use	rational	approximations	of	irrational	numbers	to	compare	the	size	
of	irrational	numbers,	locate	them	approximately	on	a	number	line	
diagram,	and	estimate	the	value	of	expressions	(e.g.,	π2).	For example, 
by truncating the decimal expansion of √2, show that √2 is between 1 and 
2, then between 1.4 and 1.5, and explain how to continue on to get better 
approximations.
expressions and equations   8.ee
Work with radicals and integer exponents. 
1.	 Know	and	apply	the	properties	of	integer	exponents	to	generate	
equivalent	numerical	expressions.	For example, 32 × 3–5 = 3–3 = 1/33 = 1/27.
2.	 Use	square	root	and	cube	root	symbols	to	represent	solutions	to	
equations	of	the	form	x2	=	p	and	x3	=	p,	where	p	is	a	positive	rational	
number.	Evaluate	square	roots	of	small	perfect	squares	and	cube	roots	
of	small	perfect	cubes.	Know	that	√2	is	irrational.
3.	 Use	numbers	expressed	in	the	form	of	a	single	digit	times	an	integer	
power	of	10	to	estimate	very	large	or	very	small	quantities,	and	to	
express	how	many	times	as	much	one	is	than	the	other.	For example, 
estimate the population of the United States as 3 × 108 and the population 
of the world as 7 × 109, and determine that the world population is more 
than 20 times larger.
4.	 Perform	operations	with	numbers	expressed	in	scientific	notation,	
including	problems	where	both	decimal	and	scientific	notation	are	
used.	Use	scientific	notation	and	choose	units	of	appropriate	size	
for	measurements	of	very	large	or	very	small	quantities	(e.g.,	use	
millimeters	per	year	for	seafloor	spreading).	Interpret	scientific	
notation	that	has	been	generated	by	technology.
Understand the connections between proportional relationships, 
lines, and linear equations.
5.	 Graph	proportional	relationships,	interpreting	the	unit	rate	as	the	
slope	of	the	graph.	Compare	two	different	proportional	relationships	
represented	in	different	ways.	For example, compare a distance-time 
graph to a distance-time equation to determine which of two moving 
objects has greater speed.
6.	 Use	similar	triangles	to	explain	why	the	slope	m	is	the	same	between	
any	two	distinct	points	on	a	non-vertical	line	in	the	coordinate	plane;	
derive	the	equation	y	=	mx	for	a	line	through	the	origin	and	the	
equation	y	=	mx	+	b	for	a	line	intercepting	the	vertical	axis	at	b.
Analyze and solve linear equations and pairs of simultaneous linear 
equations.
7 .	 	Solve	linear	equations	in	one	variable.
a.	 Give	examples	of	linear	equations	in	one	variable	with	one	
solution,	infinitely	many	solutions,	or	no	solutions.	Show	which	
of	these	possibilities	is	the	case	by	successively	transforming	the	
given	equation	into	simpler	forms,	until	an	equivalent	equation	of	
the	form	x	=	a,	a	=	a,	or	a	=	b	results	(where	a	and	b	are	different	
numbers).
b.	 Solve	linear	equations	with	rational	number	coefficients,	including	
equations	whose	solutions	require	expanding	expressions	using	
the	distributive	property	and	collecting	like	terms.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 8   |   55
8.	 Analyze	and	solve	pairs	of	simultaneous	linear	equations.
a.	 Understand	that	solutions	to	a	system	of	two	linear	equations	
in	two	variables	correspond	to	points	of	intersection	of	their	
graphs,	because	points	of	intersection	satisfy	both	equations	
simultaneously.
b.	 Solve	systems	of	two	linear	equations	in	two	variables	
algebraically,	and	estimate	solutions	by	graphing	the	equations.	
Solve	simple	cases	by	inspection.	For example, 3x + 2y = 5 and 3x + 
2y = 6 have no solution because 3x + 2y cannot simultaneously be 5 
and 6.
c.	 Solve	real-world	and	mathematical	problems	leading	to	two	linear	
equations	in	two	variables.	For example, given coordinates for two 
pairs of points, determine whether the line through the first pair of 
points intersects the line through the second pair.
functions  8.f
Define, evaluate, and compare functions.
1.	 Understand	that	a	function	is	a	rule	that	assigns	to	each	input	exactly	
one	output.	The	graph	of	a	function	is	the	set	of	ordered	pairs	
consisting	of	an	input	and	the	corresponding	output.1
2.	 Compare	properties	of	two	functions	each	represented	in	a	different	
way	(algebraically,	graphically,	numerically	in	tables,	or	by	verbal	
descriptions).	For example, given a linear function represented by a table 
of values and a linear function represented by an algebraic expression, 
determine which function has the greater rate of change. 
3.	 Interpret	the	equation	y	=	mx	+	b	as	defining	a	linear	function,	whose	
graph	is	a	straight	line;	give	examples	of	functions	that	are	not	linear.	
For example, the function A = s2 giving the area of a square as a function 
of its side length is not linear because its graph contains the points (1,1), 
(2,4) and (3,9), which are not on a straight line.
Use functions to model relationships between quantities.
4.	 Construct	a	function	to	model	a	linear	relationship	between	two	
quantities.	Determine	the	rate	of	change	and	initial	value	of	the	
function	from	a	description	of	a	relationship	or	from	two	(x,	y)	values,	
including	reading	these	from	a	table	or	from	a	graph.	Interpret	the	rate	
of	change	and	initial	value	of	a	linear	function	in	terms	of	the	situation	
it	models,	and	in	terms	of	its	graph	or	a	table	of	values.
5.	 Describe	qualitatively	the	functional	relationship	between	two	
quantities	by	analyzing	a	graph	(e.g.,	where	the	function	is	increasing	
or	decreasing,	linear	or	nonlinear).	Sketch	a	graph	that	exhibits	the	
qualitative	features	of	a	function	that	has	been	described	verbally.
Geometry   8.G
Understand congruence and similarity using physical models, trans-
parencies, or geometry software.
1.	 Verify	experimentally	the	properties	of	rotations,	reflections,	and	
translations:	
a.	 Lines	are	taken	to	lines,	and	line	segments	to	line	segments	of	the	
same	length.
b.	 Angles	are	taken	to	angles	of	the	same	measure.
c.	 Parallel	lines	are	taken	to	parallel	lines.	
2.	 Understand	that	a	two-dimensional	figure	is	congruent	to	another	if	
the	second	can	be	obtained	from	the	first	by	a	sequence	of	rotations,	
reflections,	and	translations;	given	two	congruent	figures,	describe	a	
sequence	that	exhibits	the	congruence	between	them.
1Function	notation	is	not	required	in	Grade	8.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
Grade 8   |   56
3.	 Describe	the	effect	of	dilations,	translations,	rotations,	and	reflections	
on	two-dimensional	figures	using	coordinates.
4.	 Understand	that	a	two-dimensional	figure	is	similar	to	another	if	the	
second	can	be	obtained	from	the	first	by	a	sequence	of	rotations,	
reflections,	translations,	and	dilations;	given	two	similar	two-
dimensional	figures,	describe	a	sequence	that	exhibits	the	similarity	
between	them.
5.	 Use	informal	arguments	to	establish	facts	about	the	angle	sum	and	
exterior	angle	of	triangles,	about	the	angles	created	when	parallel	lines	
are	cut	by	a	transversal,	and	the	angle-angle	criterion	for	similarity	of	
triangles.	For example, arrange three copies of the same triangle so that 
the sum of the three angles appears to form a line, and give an argument 
in terms of transversals why this is so.
Understand and apply the Pythagorean Theorem.
6.	 Explain	a	proof	of	the	Pythagorean	Theorem	and	its	converse.	
7 .	 Apply	the	Pythagorean	Theorem	to	determine	unknown	side	lengths	
in	right	triangles	in	real-world	and	mathematical	problems	in	two	and	
three	dimensions.
8.	 Apply	the	Pythagorean	Theorem	to	find	the	distance	between	two	
points	in	a	coordinate	system.
Solve real-world and mathematical problems involving volume of 
cylinders, cones, and spheres.
9.	 Know	the	formulas	for	the	volumes	of	cones,	cylinders,	and	spheres	
and	use	them	to	solve	real-world	and	mathematical	problems.
Statistics and Probability  8.SP
Investigate patterns of association in bivariate data.
1.	 Construct	and	interpret	scatter	plots	for	bivariate	measurement	
data	to	investigate	patterns	of	association	between	two	quantities.	
Describe	patterns	such	as	clustering,	outliers,	positive	or	negative	
association,	linear	association,	and	nonlinear	association.
2.	 Know	that	straight	lines	are	widely	used	to	model	relationships	
between	two	quantitative	variables.	For	scatter	plots	that	suggest	a	
linear	association,	informally	fit	a	straight	line,	and	informally	assess	
the	model	fit	by	judging	the	closeness	of	the	data	points	to	the	line.
3.	 Use	the	equation	of	a	linear	model	to	solve	problems	in	the	context	
of	bivariate	measurement	data,	interpreting	the	slope	and	intercept.	
For example, in a linear model for a biology experiment, interpret a slope 
of 1.5 cm/hr as meaning that an additional hour of sunlight each day is 
associated with an additional 1.5 cm in mature plant height.
4.	 Understand	that	patterns	of	association	can	also	be	seen	in	bivariate	
categorical	data	by	displaying	frequencies	and	relative	frequencies	in	
a	two-way	table.	Construct	and	interpret	a	two-way	table	summarizing	
data	on	two	categorical	variables	collected	from	the	same	subjects.	
Use	relative	frequencies	calculated	for	rows	or	columns	to	describe	
possible	association	between	the	two	variables.	For example, collect 
data from students in your class on whether or not they have a curfew on 
school nights and whether or not they have assigned chores at home. Is 
there evidence that those who have a curfew also tend to have chores?