Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool   |   57
mathematics Standards for High School
The	high	school	standards	specify	the	mathematics	that	all	students	should	
study	in	order	to	be	college	and	career	ready.	Additional	mathematics	that	
students	should	learn	in	order	to	take	advanced	courses	such	as	calculus,	
advanced	statistics,	or	discrete	mathematics	is	indicated	by	(+),	as	in	this	
example:	
(+)	Represent	complex	numbers	on	the	complex	plane	in	rectangular	
and	polar	form	(including	real	and	imaginary	numbers).	
All	standards	without	a	(+)	symbol	should	be	in	the	common	mathematics	
curriculum	for	all	college	and	career	ready	students.	Standards	with	a	(+)	
symbol	may	also	appear	in	courses	intended	for	all	students.
The	high	school	standards	are	listed	in	conceptual	categories:
•	 Number	and	Quantity
•	 Algebra
•	 Functions
•	 Modeling
•	 Geometry
•	 Statistics	and	Probability
Conceptual	categories	portray	a	coherent	view	of	high	school	
mathematics;	a	student’s	work	with	functions,	for	example,	crosses	a	
number	of	traditional	course	boundaries,	potentially	up	through	and	
including	calculus.
Modeling	is	best	interpreted	not	as	a	collection	of	isolated	topics	but	in	
relation	to	other	standards.	Making	mathematical	models	is	a	Standard	for	
Mathematical	Practice,	and	specific	modeling	standards	appear	throughout	
the	high	school	standards	indicated	by	a	star	symbol	(★).	The	star	symbol	
sometimes	appears	on	the	heading	for	a	group	of	standards;	in	that	case,	it	
should	be	understood	to	apply	to	all	standards	in	that	group.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — nUmber and qUantIty   |   58
mathematics | High School—number and 
Quantity
Numbers and Number Systems.	During	the	years	from	kindergarten	to	eighth	
grade,	students	must	repeatedly	extend	their	conception	of	number.	At	first,	
“number”	means	“counting	number”:	1,	2,	3...	Soon	after	that,	0	is	used	to	represent	
“none”	and	the	whole	numbers	are	formed	by	the	counting	numbers	together	
with	zero.	The	next	extension	is	fractions.	At	first,	fractions	are	barely	numbers	
and	tied	strongly	to	pictorial	representations.	Y et	by	the	time	students	understand	
division	of	fractions,	they	have	a	strong	concept	of	fractions	as	numbers	and	have	
connected	them,	via	their	decimal	representations,	with	the	base-ten	system	used	
to	represent	the	whole	numbers.	During	middle	school,	fractions	are	augmented	by	
negative	fractions	to	form	the	rational	numbers.	In	Grade	8,	students	extend	this	
system	once	more,	augmenting	the	rational	numbers	with	the	irrational	numbers	
to	form	the	real	numbers.	In	high	school,	students	will	be	exposed	to	yet	another	
extension	of	number,	when	the	real	numbers	are	augmented	by	the	imaginary	
numbers	to	form	the	complex	numbers.	
With	each	extension	of	number,	the	meanings	of	addition,	subtraction,	
multiplication,	and	division	are	extended.	In	each	new	number	system—integers,	
rational	numbers,	real	numbers,	and	complex	numbers—the	four	operations	stay	
the	same	in	two	important	ways:	They	have	the	commutative,	associative,	and	
distributive	properties	and	their	new	meanings	are	consistent	with	their	previous	
meanings.	
Extending	the	properties	of	whole-number	exponents	leads	to	new	and	productive	
notation.	For	example,	properties	of	whole-number	exponents	suggest	that	(51/3)3	
should	be	5(1/3)3	=	51	=	5	and	that	51/3	should	be	the	cube	root	of	5.	
Calculators,	spreadsheets,	and	computer	algebra	systems	can	provide	ways	for	
students	to	become	better	acquainted	with	these	new	number	systems	and	their	
notation.	They	can	be	used	to	generate	data	for	numerical	experiments,	to	help	
understand	the	workings	of	matrix,	vector,	and	complex	number	algebra,	and	to	
experiment	with	non-integer	exponents.
Quantities.	In	real	world	problems,	the	answers	are	usually	not	numbers	but	
quantities:	numbers	with	units,	which	involves	measurement.	In	their	work	in	
measurement	up	through	Grade	8,	students	primarily	measure	commonly	used	
attributes	such	as	length,	area,	and	volume.	In	high	school,	students	encounter	a	
wider	variety	of	units	in	modeling,	e.g.,	acceleration,	currency	conversions,	derived	
quantities	such	as	person-hours	and	heating	degree	days,	social	science	rates	such	
as	per-capita	income,	and	rates	in	everyday	life	such	as	points	scored	per	game	or	
batting	averages.	They	also	encounter	novel	situations	in	which	they	themselves	
must	conceive	the	attributes	of	interest.	For	example,	to	find	a	good	measure	of	
overall	highway	safety,	they	might	propose	measures	such	as	fatalities	per	year,	
fatalities	per	year	per	driver,	or	fatalities	per	vehicle-mile	traveled.	Such	a	conceptual	
process	is	sometimes	called	quantification.	Quantification	is	important	for	science,	
as	when	surface	area	suddenly	“stands	out”	as	an	important	variable	in	evaporation.	
Quantification	is	also	important	for	companies,	which	must	conceptualize	relevant	
attributes	and	create	or	choose	suitable	measures	for	them.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — nUmber and qUantIty   |   59
The Real Number System
• extend the properties of exponents to rational 
exponents
• Use properties of rational and irrational 
numbers.
Quantities
• reason quantitatively and use units to solve 
problems
The Complex Number System
• Perform arithmetic operations with complex 
numbers
• represent complex numbers and their 
operations on the complex plane
• Use complex numbers in polynomial identities 
and equations
Vector and Matrix Quantities
• represent and model with vector quantities.
• Perform operations on vectors.
• Perform operations on matrices and use 
matrices in applications.
mathematical Practices 
1.	 	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.		 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.		 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.		 Model	with	mathematics.
5.		 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.		 Attend	to	precision.
7 .		 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.		 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
number and Quantity overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — nUmber and qUantIty   |   60
the real number System  n-rn
Extend the properties of exponents to rational exponents.
1.	 Explain	how	the	definition	of	the	meaning	of	rational	exponents	
follows	from	extending	the	properties	of	integer	exponents	to	
those	values,	allowing	for	a	notation	for	radicals	in	terms	of	rational	
exponents.	For example, we define 51/3 to be the cube root of 5 
because we want (51/3)3 = 5(1/3)3 to hold, so (51/3)3 must equal 5.
2.	 Rewrite	expressions	involving	radicals	and	rational	exponents	using	
the	properties	of	exponents.	
Use properties of rational and irrational numbers.
3.	 Explain	why	the	sum	or	product	of	two	rational	numbers	is	rational;	
that	the	sum	of	a	rational	number	and	an	irrational	number	is	irrational;	
and	that	the	product	of	a	nonzero	rational	number	and	an	irrational	
number	is	irrational.
Quantities★  n-Q
Reason quantitatively and use units to solve problems.
1.	 Use	units	as	a	way	to	understand	problems	and	to	guide	the	solution	
of	multi-step	problems;	choose	and	interpret	units	consistently	in	
formulas;	choose	and	interpret	the	scale	and	the	origin	in	graphs	and	
data	displays.	
2.	 Define	appropriate	quantities	for	the	purpose	of	descriptive	modeling.
3.	 Choose	a	level	of	accuracy	appropriate	to	limitations	on	measurement	
when	reporting	quantities.	
the Complex number System  n-Cn
Perform arithmetic operations with complex numbers.
1.	 Know	there	is	a	complex	number	i	such	that	i2	=	–1,	and	every	complex	
number	has	the	form	a +	bi with	a	and	b	real.	
2.	 Use	the	relation	i2	=	–1	and	the	commutative,	associative,	and	
distributive	properties	to	add,	subtract,	and	multiply	complex	
numbers.
3.	 (+)	Find	the	conjugate	of	a	complex	number;	use	conjugates	to	find	
moduli	and	quotients	of	complex	numbers.
Represent complex numbers and their operations on the complex 
plane.
4.	 (+)	Represent	complex	numbers	on	the	complex	plane	in	rectangular	
and	polar	form	(including	real	and	imaginary	numbers),	and	explain	
why	the	rectangular	and	polar	forms	of	a	given	complex	number	
represent	the	same	number.
5.	 (+)	Represent	addition,	subtraction,	multiplication,	and	conjugation	of	
complex	numbers	geometrically	on	the	complex	plane;	use	properties	
of	this	representation	for	computation.	For example, (–1	+	√3	i)3	=	8	
because	(–1	+	√3	i)	has modulus	2	and argument	120°.
6.	 (+)	Calculate	the	distance	between	numbers	in	the	complex	plane	as	
the	modulus	of	the	difference,	and	the	midpoint	of	a	segment	as	the	
average	of	the	numbers	at	its	endpoints.
Use complex numbers in polynomial identities and equations.
7 .	 	Solve	quadratic	equations	with	real	coefficients	that	have	complex	
solutions.
8.	 (+)	Extend	polynomial	identities	to	the	complex	numbers.	For example, 
rewrite x2	+	4	as	(x	+	2i)(x	–	2i).
9.	 (+)	Know	the	Fundamental	Theorem	of	Algebra;	show	that	it	is	true	for	
quadratic	polynomials.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — nUmber and qUantIty   |   61
Vector and matrix Quantities  n-Vm
Represent and model with vector quantities.
1.	 (+)	Recognize	vector	quantities	as	having	both	magnitude	and	
direction.	Represent	vector	quantities	by	directed	line	segments,	and	
use	appropriate	symbols	for	vectors	and	their	magnitudes	(e.g.,	v,	|v|,	
||v||,	v).
2.	 (+)	Find	the	components	of	a	vector	by	subtracting	the	coordinates	of	
an	initial	point	from	the	coordinates	of	a	terminal	point.	
3.	 (+)	Solve	problems	involving	velocity	and	other	quantities	that	can	be	
represented	by	vectors.
Perform operations on vectors.
4.	 (+)	Add	and	subtract	vectors.
a.	 Add	vectors	end-to-end,	component-wise,	and	by	the	
parallelogram	rule.	Understand	that	the	magnitude	of	a	sum	of	
two	vectors	is	typically	not	the	sum	of	the	magnitudes.
b.	 Given	two	vectors	in	magnitude	and	direction	form,	determine	the	
magnitude	and	direction	of	their	sum.
c.	 Understand	vector	subtraction	v	–	w	as	v	+	(–w),	where	–w	is	the	
additive	inverse	of	w,	with	the	same	magnitude	as	w	and	pointing	
in	the	opposite	direction.	Represent	vector	subtraction	graphically	
by	connecting	the	tips	in	the	appropriate	order,	and	perform	
vector	subtraction	component-wise.
5.	 (+)	Multiply	a	vector	by	a	scalar.
a.	 Represent	scalar	multiplication	graphically	by	scaling	vectors	and	
possibly	reversing	their	direction;	perform	scalar	multiplication	
component-wise,	e.g.,	as	c(vx,	vy)	=	(cvx,	cvy).
b.	 Compute	the	magnitude	of	a	scalar	multiple	cv	using	||cv||	=	|c|v.	
Compute	the	direction	of	cv	knowing	that	when	|c|v	≠	0,	the	
direction	of	cv	is	either	along	v	(for	c	>	0)	or	against	v	(for	c	<	0).
Perform operations on matrices and use matrices in applications.
6.	 (+)	Use	matrices	to	represent	and	manipulate	data,	e.g.,	to	represent	
payoffs	or	incidence	relationships	in	a	network.
7 .	 (+)	Multiply	matrices	by	scalars	to	produce	new	matrices,	e.g.,	as	when	
all	of	the	payoffs	in	a	game	are	doubled.	
8.	 (+)	Add,	subtract,	and	multiply	matrices	of	appropriate	dimensions.	
9.	 (+)	Understand	that,	unlike	multiplication	of	numbers,	matrix	
multiplication	for	square	matrices	is	not	a	commutative	operation,	but	
still	satisfies	the	associative	and	distributive	properties.
10.	 (+)	Understand	that	the	zero	and	identity	matrices	play	a	role	in	matrix	
addition	and	multiplication	similar	to	the	role	of	0	and	1	in	the	real	
numbers.	The	determinant	of	a	square	matrix	is	nonzero	if	and	only	if	
the	matrix	has	a	multiplicative	inverse.	
11.	 (+)	Multiply	a	vector	(regarded	as	a	matrix	with	one	column)	by	a	
matrix	of	suitable	dimensions	to	produce	another	vector.	Work	with	
matrices	as	transformations	of	vectors.
12.	 (+)	Work	with	2	×	2	matrices	as	transformations	of	the	plane,	and	
interpret	the	absolute	value	of	the	determinant	in	terms	of	area.