Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — alGebra   |   62
mathematics | High School—algebra
Expressions.	An	expression	is	a	record	of	a	computation	with	numbers,	symbols	
that	represent	numbers,	arithmetic	operations,	exponentiation,	and,	at	more	
advanced	levels,	the	operation	of	evaluating	a	function.	Conventions	about	the	
use	of	parentheses	and	the	order	of	operations	assure	that	each	expression	is	
unambiguous.	Creating	an	expression	that	describes	a	computation	involving	a	
general	quantity	requires	the	ability	to	express	the	computation	in	general	terms,	
abstracting	from	specific	instances.
Reading	an	expression	with	comprehension	involves	analysis	of	its	underlying	
structure.	This	may	suggest	a	different	but	equivalent	way	of	writing	the	expression	
that	exhibits	some	different	aspect	of	its	meaning.	For	example,	p	+	0.05p	can	be	
interpreted	as	the	addition	of	a	5%	tax	to	a	price	p.	Rewriting	p	+	0.05p	as	1.05p	
shows	that	adding	a	tax	is	the	same	as	multiplying	the	price	by	a	constant	factor.	
Algebraic	manipulations	are	governed	by	the	properties	of	operations	and	
exponents,	and	the	conventions	of	algebraic	notation.	At	times,	an	expression	is	the	
result	of	applying	operations	to	simpler	expressions.	For	example,	p	+	0.05p	is	the	
sum	of	the	simpler	expressions	p	and	0.05p.	Viewing	an	expression	as	the	result	of	
operation	on	simpler	expressions	can	sometimes	clarify	its	underlying	structure.
A	spreadsheet	or	a	computer	algebra	system	(CAS)	can	be	used	to	experiment	
with	algebraic	expressions,	perform	complicated	algebraic	manipulations,	and	
understand	how	algebraic	manipulations	behave.	
Equations and inequalities.	An	equation	is	a	statement	of	equality	between	two	
expressions,	often	viewed	as	a	question	asking	for	which	values	of	the	variables	the	
expressions	on	either	side	are	in	fact	equal.	These	values	are	the	solutions	to	the	
equation.	An	identity,	in	contrast,	is	true	for	all	values	of	the	variables;	identities	are	
often	developed	by	rewriting	an	expression	in	an	equivalent	form.
The	solutions	of	an	equation	in	one	variable	form	a	set	of	numbers;	the	solutions	of	
an	equation	in	two	variables	form	a	set	of	ordered	pairs	of	numbers,	which	can	be	
plotted	in	the	coordinate	plane.	Two	or	more	equations	and/or	inequalities	form	a	
system.	A	solution	for	such	a	system	must	satisfy	every	equation	and	inequality	in	
the	system.
An	equation	can	often	be	solved	by	successively	deducing	from	it	one	or	more	
simpler	equations.	For	example,	one	can	add	the	same	constant	to	both	sides	
without	changing	the	solutions,	but	squaring	both	sides	might	lead	to	extraneous	
solutions.	Strategic	competence	in	solving	includes	looking	ahead	for	productive	
manipulations	and	anticipating	the	nature	and	number	of	solutions.
Some	equations	have	no	solutions	in	a	given	number	system,	but	have	a	solution	
in	a	larger	system.	For	example,	the	solution	of	x	+	1	=	0	is	an	integer,	not	a	whole	
number;	the	solution	of	2x	+	1	=	0	is	a	rational	number,	not	an	integer;	the	solutions	
of	x2	–	2	=	0	are	real	numbers,	not	rational	numbers;	and	the	solutions	of	x2	+	2	=	0	
are	complex	numbers,	not	real	numbers.
The	same	solution	techniques	used	to	solve	equations	can	be	used	to	rearrange	
formulas.	For	example,	the	formula	for	the	area	of	a	trapezoid,	A	=	((b1+b2)/2)h,	can	
be	solved	for	h	using	the	same	deductive	process.	
Inequalities	can	be	solved	by	reasoning	about	the	properties	of	inequality.	Many,	
but	not	all,	of	the	properties	of	equality	continue	to	hold	for	inequalities	and	can	be	
useful	in	solving	them.
Connections to Functions and Modeling. Expressions	can	define	functions,	
and	equivalent	expressions	define	the	same	function.	Asking	when	two	functions	
have	the	same	value	for	the	same	input	leads	to	an	equation;	graphing	the	two	
functions	allows	for	finding	approximate	solutions	of	the	equation.	Converting	a	
verbal	description	to	an	equation,	inequality,	or	system	of	these	is	an	essential	skill	
in	modeling.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — alGebra   |   63
Seeing Structure in Expressions
• Interpret the structure of expressions
• Write expressions in equivalent forms to solve 
problems
Arithmetic with Polynomials and Rational  
Expressions
• Perform arithmetic operations on polynomials
• Understand the relationship between zeros and 
factors of polynomials
• Use polynomial identities to solve problems
• rewrite rational expressions
Creating Equations
• Create equations that describe numbers or 
relationships
Reasoning with Equations and Inequalities
• Understand solving equations as a process of 
reasoning and explain the reasoning
• Solve equations and inequalities in one variable
• Solve systems of equations
• represent and solve equations and inequalities 
graphically
mathematical Practices 
1.	 	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.		 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.		 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.		 Model	with	mathematics.
5.		 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.		 Attend	to	precision.
7 .		 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.		 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
algebra overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — alGebra   |   64
Seeing Structure in expressions   a-SSe
Interpret the structure of expressions
1.	 Interpret	expressions	that	represent	a	quantity	in	terms	of	its	context.★
a.	 Interpret	parts	of	an	expression,	such	as	terms,	factors,	and	
coefficients.
b.	 Interpret	complicated	expressions	by	viewing	one	or	more	of	their	
parts	as	a	single	entity.	For example, interpret	P(1+r)n	as the product 
of P and a factor not depending on P .
2.	 Use	the	structure	of	an	expression	to	identify	ways	to	rewrite	it.	For 
example, see x4	–	y4	as	(x2)2	–	(y2)2,	thus recognizing it as a difference of 
squares that can be factored as	(x2	–	y2)(x2	+	y2).
Write expressions in equivalent forms to solve problems
3.	 Choose	and	produce	an	equivalent	form	of	an	expression	to	reveal	and	
explain	properties	of	the	quantity	represented	by	the	expression.★
a.	 Factor	a	quadratic	expression	to	reveal	the	zeros	of	the	function	it	
defines.
b.	 Complete	the	square	in	a	quadratic	expression	to	reveal	the	
maximum	or	minimum	value	of	the	function	it	defines.
c.	 Use	the	properties	of	exponents	to	transform	expressions	for	
exponential	functions. For example the expression	1.15t	can be 
rewritten as	(1.151/12)12t	≈	1.01212t	to reveal the approximate equivalent 
monthly interest rate if the annual rate is 15%.
4.	 Derive	the	formula	for	the	sum	of	a	finite	geometric	series	(when	the	
common	ratio	is	not	1),	and	use	the	formula	to	solve	problems.	For 
example, calculate mortgage payments.★
arithmetic with Polynomials and rational expressions  a-aPr
Perform arithmetic operations on polynomials
1.	 Understand	that	polynomials	form	a	system	analogous	to	the	integers,	
namely,	they	are	closed	under	the	operations	of	addition,	subtraction,	
and	multiplication;	add,	subtract,	and	multiply	polynomials.
Understand the relationship between zeros and factors of 
polynomials
2.	 Know	and	apply	the	Remainder	Theorem:	For	a	polynomial	p(x)	and	a	
number	a,	the	remainder	on	division	by	x	–	a	is	p(a),	so	p(a)	=	0	if	and	
only	if	(x	–	a)	is	a	factor	of	p(x).
3.	 Identify	zeros	of	polynomials	when	suitable	factorizations	are	
available,	and	use	the	zeros	to	construct	a	rough	graph	of	the	function	
defined	by	the	polynomial.
Use polynomial identities to solve problems
4.	 Prove	polynomial	identities	and	use	them	to	describe	numerical	
relationships.	For example, the polynomial identity	(x2	+	y2)2	=	(x2	–	y2)2	+	
(2xy)2	can be used to generate Pythagorean triples.
5.	 (+)	Know	and	apply	the	Binomial	Theorem	for	the	expansion	of	(x	
+	y)n	in	powers	of	x	and	y	for	a	positive	integer	n,	where	x	and	y	are	
any	numbers,	with	coefficients	determined	for	example	by	Pascal’s	
Triangle.1
1The	Binomial	Theorem	can	be	proved	by	mathematical	induction	or	by	a	com-
binatorial	argument.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — alGebra   |   65
Rewrite rational expressions
6.	 Rewrite	simple	rational	expressions	in	different	forms;	write	a(x)/b(x)	
in	the	form	q(x)	+	r(x)/b(x),	where	a(x),	b(x),	q(x),	and	r(x)	are	
polynomials	with	the	degree	of	r(x)	less	than	the	degree	of	b(x),	using	
inspection,	long	division,	or,	for	the	more	complicated	examples,	a	
computer	algebra	system.
7 .	 (+)	Understand	that	rational	expressions	form	a	system	analogous	
to	the	rational	numbers,	closed	under	addition,	subtraction,	
multiplication,	and	division	by	a	nonzero	rational	expression;	add,	
subtract,	multiply,	and	divide	rational	expressions.
Creating equations★  a-Ced
Create equations that describe numbers or relationships
1.	 Create	equations	and	inequalities	in	one	variable	and	use	them	to	
solve	problems.	Include equations arising from linear and quadratic 
functions, and simple rational and exponential functions.
2.	 Create	equations	in	two	or	more	variables	to	represent	relationships	
between	quantities;	graph	equations	on	coordinate	axes	with	labels	
and	scales.
3.	 Represent	constraints	by	equations	or	inequalities,	and	by	systems	of	
equations	and/or	inequalities,	and	interpret	solutions	as	viable	or	non-
viable	options	in	a	modeling	context.	For example, represent inequalities 
describing nutritional and cost constraints on combinations of different 
foods.
4.	 Rearrange	formulas	to	highlight	a	quantity	of	interest,	using	the	same	
reasoning	as	in	solving	equations.	For example, rearrange Ohm’s law V = 
IR to highlight resistance R.
reasoning with equations and Inequalities  a-reI
Understand solving equations as a process of reasoning and explain 
the reasoning 
1.	 Explain	each	step	in	solving	a	simple	equation	as	following	from	the	
equality	of	numbers	asserted	at	the	previous	step,	starting	from	the	
assumption	that	the	original	equation	has	a	solution.	Construct	a	
viable	argument	to	justify	a	solution	method.
2.	 Solve	simple	rational	and	radical	equations	in	one	variable,	and	give	
examples	showing	how	extraneous	solutions	may	arise.
Solve equations and inequalities in one variable
3.	 Solve	linear	equations	and	inequalities	in	one	variable,	including	
equations	with	coefficients	represented	by	letters.
4.	 Solve	quadratic	equations	in	one	variable.
a.	 Use	the	method	of	completing	the	square	to	transform	any	
quadratic	equation	in	x	into	an	equation	of	the	form	(x	–	p)2	=	q	
that	has	the	same	solutions.	Derive	the	quadratic	formula	from	
this	form.
b.	 Solve	quadratic	equations	by	inspection	(e.g.,	for	x2	=	49),	taking	
square	roots,	completing	the	square,	the	quadratic	formula	and	
factoring,	as	appropriate	to	the	initial	form	of	the	equation.	
Recognize	when	the	quadratic	formula	gives	complex	solutions	
and	write	them	as	a	±	bi	for	real	numbers	a	and	b.	
Solve systems of equations
5.	 Prove	that,	given	a	system	of	two	equations	in	two	variables,	replacing	
one	equation	by	the	sum	of	that	equation	and	a	multiple	of	the	other	
produces	a	system	with	the	same	solutions.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — alGebra   |   66
6.	 Solve	systems	of	linear	equations	exactly	and	approximately	(e.g.,	with	
graphs),	focusing	on	pairs	of	linear	equations	in	two	variables.
7 .	 Solve	a	simple	system	consisting	of	a	linear	equation	and	a	quadratic	
equation	in	two	variables	algebraically	and	graphically.	For example, 
find the points of intersection between the line y	=	–3x	and	the	circle	x2	+	
y2	=	3.
8.	 (+)	Represent	a	system	of	linear	equations	as	a	single	matrix	equation	
in	a	vector	variable.
9.	 (+)	Find	the	inverse	of	a	matrix	if	it	exists	and	use	it	to	solve	systems	
of	linear	equations	(using	technology	for	matrices	of	dimension	3	×	3	
or	greater).
Represent and solve equations and inequalities graphically
10.	 Understand	that	the	graph	of	an	equation	in	two	variables	is	the	set	of	
all	its	solutions	plotted	in	the	coordinate	plane,	often	forming	a	curve	
(which	could	be	a	line).
11.	 Explain	why	the	x-coordinates	of	the	points	where	the	graphs	of	
the	equations	y	=	f(x)	and	y	=	g(x)	intersect	are	the	solutions	of	the	
equation	f(x)	=	g(x);	find	the	solutions	approximately,	e.g.,	using	
technology	to	graph	the	functions,	make	tables	of	values,	or	find	
successive	approximations.	Include	cases	where	f(x)	and/or	g(x)	
are	linear,	polynomial,	rational,	absolute	value,	exponential,	and	
logarithmic	functions.★
12.	 Graph	the	solutions	to	a	linear	inequality	in	two	variables	as	a	half-
plane	(excluding	the	boundary	in	the	case	of	a	strict	inequality),	and	
graph	the	solution	set	to	a	system	of	linear	inequalities	in	two	variables	
as	the	intersection	of	the	corresponding	half-planes.