Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — fUnCtIonS   |   67
mathematics | High School—functions
Functions	describe	situations	where	one	quantity	determines	another.	For	example,	
the	return	on	$10,000	invested	at	an	annualized	percentage	rate	of	4.25%	is	a	
function	of	the	length	of	time	the	money	is	invested.	Because	we	continually	make	
theories	about	dependencies	between	quantities	in	nature	and	society,	functions	
are	important	tools	in	the	construction	of	mathematical	models.	
In	school	mathematics,	functions	usually	have	numerical	inputs	and	outputs	and	are	
often	defined	by	an	algebraic	expression.	For	example,	the	time	in	hours	it	takes	for	
a	car	to	drive	100	miles	is	a	function	of	the	car’s	speed	in	miles	per	hour,	v;	the	rule	
T(v)	=	100/v	expresses	this	relationship	algebraically	and	defines	a	function	whose	
name	is	T.	
The	set	of	inputs	to	a	function	is	called	its	domain.	We	often	infer	the	domain	to	be	
all	inputs	for	which	the	expression	defining	a	function	has	a	value,	or	for	which	the	
function	makes	sense	in	a	given	context.
A	function	can	be	described	in	various	ways,	such	as	by	a	graph	(e.g.,	the	trace	of	
a	seismograph);	by	a	verbal	rule,	as	in,	“I’ll	give	you	a	state,	you	give	me	the	capital	
city;”	by	an	algebraic	expression	like	f(x)	=	a	+	bx;	or	by	a	recursive	rule.	The	graph	
of	a	function	is	often	a	useful	way	of	visualizing	the	relationship	of	the	function	
models,	and	manipulating	a	mathematical	expression	for	a	function	can	throw	light	
on	the	function’s	properties.
Functions	presented	as	expressions	can	model	many	important	phenomena.	Two	
important	families	of	functions	characterized	by	laws	of	growth	are	linear	functions,	
which	grow	at	a	constant	rate,	and	exponential	functions,	which	grow	at	a	constant	
percent	rate.	Linear	functions	with	a	constant	term	of	zero	describe	proportional	
relationships.
A	graphing	utility	or	a	computer	algebra	system	can	be	used	to	experiment	with	
properties	of	these	functions	and	their	graphs	and	to	build	computational	models	
of	functions,	including	recursively	defined	functions.
Connections to Expressions, Equations, Modeling, and Coordinates.	
Determining	an	output	value	for	a	particular	input	involves	evaluating	an	expression;	
finding	inputs	that	yield	a	given	output	involves	solving	an	equation.	Questions	
about	when	two	functions	have	the	same	value	for	the	same	input	lead	to	
equations,	whose	solutions	can	be	visualized	from	the	intersection	of	their	graphs.	
Because	functions	describe	relationships	between	quantities,	they	are	frequently	
used	in	modeling.	Sometimes	functions	are	defined	by	a	recursive	process,	which	
can	be	displayed	effectively	using	a	spreadsheet	or	other	technology.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — fUnCtIonS   |   68
Interpreting Functions
• Understand the concept of a function and use 
function notation
• Interpret functions that arise in applications in 
terms of the context
• analyze functions using different 
representations
Building Functions
• Build a function that models a relationship 
between two quantities 
• Build new functions from existing functions
Linear, Quadratic, and Exponential Models
• Construct and compare linear, quadratic, and 
exponential models and solve problems
• Interpret expressions for functions in terms of 
the situation they model
Trigonometric Functions
• extend the domain of trigonometric functions 
using the unit circle
• model periodic phenomena with trigonometric 
functions
• Prove and apply trigonometric identities
mathematical Practices 
1.	 	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.		 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.		 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.		 Model	with	mathematics.
5.		 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.		 Attend	to	precision.
7 .		 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.		 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
functions overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — fUnCtIonS   |   69
Interpreting functions   f-If
Understand the concept of a function and use function notation
1.	 Understand	that	a	function	from	one	set	(called	the	domain)	to	
another	set	(called	the	range)	assigns	to	each	element	of	the	domain	
exactly	one	element	of	the	range.	If	f	is	a	function	and	x	is	an	element	
of	its	domain,	then	f(x)	denotes	the	output	of	f	corresponding	to	the	
input	x.	The	graph	of	f	is	the	graph	of	the	equation	y	=	f(x).
2.	 Use	function	notation,	evaluate	functions	for	inputs	in	their	domains,	
and	interpret	statements	that	use	function	notation	in	terms	of	a	
context.
3.	 Recognize	that	sequences	are	functions,	sometimes	defined	
recursively,	whose	domain	is	a	subset	of	the	integers.	For example, the 
Fibonacci sequence is defined recursively by f(0) = f(1) = 1, f(n+1) = f(n) + 
f(n-1) for n ≥ 1. 
Interpret functions that arise in applications in terms of the context
4.	 For	a	function	that	models	a	relationship	between	two	quantities,	
interpret	key	features	of	graphs	and	tables	in	terms	of	the	quantities,	
and	sketch	graphs	showing	key	features	given	a	verbal	description	
of	the	relationship.	Key features include: intercepts; intervals where the 
function is increasing, decreasing, positive, or negative; relative maximums 
and minimums; symmetries; end behavior; and periodicity.★	
5.	 Relate	the	domain	of	a	function	to	its	graph	and,	where	applicable,	to	
the	quantitative	relationship	it	describes.	For example, if the function 
h(n) gives the number of person-hours it takes to assemble n engines in a 
factory, then the positive integers would be an appropriate domain for the 
function.★
6.	 Calculate	and	interpret	the	average	rate	of	change	of	a	function	
(presented	symbolically	or	as	a	table)	over	a	specified	interval.	
Estimate	the	rate	of	change	from	a	graph.★
Analyze functions using different representations
7 .	 Graph	functions	expressed	symbolically	and	show	key	features	of	
the	graph,	by	hand	in	simple	cases	and	using	technology	for	more	
complicated	cases.★
a.	 Graph	linear	and	quadratic	functions	and	show	intercepts,	
maxima,	and	minima.
b.	 Graph	square	root,	cube	root,	and	piecewise-defined	functions,	
including	step	functions	and	absolute	value	functions.
c.	 Graph	polynomial	functions,	identifying	zeros	when	suitable	
factorizations	are	available,	and	showing	end	behavior.
d.	 (+)	Graph	rational	functions,	identifying	zeros	and	asymptotes	
when	suitable	factorizations	are	available,	and	showing	end	
behavior.
e.	 Graph	exponential	and	logarithmic	functions,	showing	intercepts	
and	end	behavior,	and	trigonometric	functions,	showing	period,	
midline,	and	amplitude.
8.	 Write	a	function	defined	by	an	expression	in	different	but	equivalent	
forms	to	reveal	and	explain	different	properties	of	the	function.
a.	 Use	the	process	of	factoring	and	completing	the	square	in	a	
quadratic	function	to	show	zeros,	extreme	values,	and	symmetry	
of	the	graph,	and	interpret	these	in	terms	of	a	context.
b.	 Use	the	properties	of	exponents	to	interpret	expressions	for	
exponential	functions.	For example, identify percent rate of change 
in functions such as y = (1.02)t, y = (0.97)t, y = (1.01)12t, y = (1.2)t/10, and 
classify them as representing exponential growth or decay.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — fUnCtIonS   |   70
9.	 Compare	properties	of	two	functions	each	represented	in	a	different	
way	(algebraically,	graphically,	numerically	in	tables,	or	by	verbal	
descriptions).	For example, given a graph of one quadratic function and 
an algebraic expression for another, say which has the larger maximum.
Building functions   f-Bf
Build a function that models a relationship between two quantities 
1.	 Write	a	function	that	describes	a	relationship	between	two	quantities.★	
a.	 Determine	an	explicit	expression,	a	recursive	process,	or	steps	for	
calculation	from	a	context.	
b.	 Combine	standard	function	types	using	arithmetic	operations.	For 
example, build a function that models the temperature of a cooling 
body by adding a constant function to a decaying exponential, and 
relate these functions to the model.
c.	 (+)	Compose	functions. For example, if T(y) is the temperature in 
the atmosphere as a function of height, and h(t) is the height of a 
weather balloon as a function of time, then T(h(t)) is the temperature 
at the location of the weather balloon as a function of time.
2.	 Write	arithmetic	and	geometric	sequences	both	recursively	and	
with	an	explicit	formula,	use	them	to	model	situations,	and	translate	
between	the	two	forms.★
Build new functions from existing functions
3.	 Identify	the	effect	on	the	graph	of	replacing	f(x)	by	f(x)	+	k,	k	f(x),	
f(kx),	and	f(x	+	k)	for	specific	values	of	k	(both	positive	and	negative);	
find	the	value	of	k	given	the	graphs.	Experiment	with	cases	and	
illustrate	an	explanation	of	the	effects	on	the	graph	using	technology.	
Include recognizing even and odd functions from their graphs and 
algebraic expressions for them.
4.	 	Find	inverse	functions.
a.	 Solve	an	equation	of	the	form	f(x)	=	c	for	a	simple	function	f	
that	has	an	inverse	and	write	an	expression	for	the	inverse.	For 
example, f(x) =2 x3 or f(x) = (x+1)/(x–1) for x ≠ 1.
b.	 (+)	Verify	by	composition	that	one	function	is	the	inverse	of	
another.
c.	 (+)	Read	values	of	an	inverse	function	from	a	graph	or	a	table,	
given	that	the	function	has	an	inverse.
d.	 (+)	Produce	an	invertible	function	from	a	non-invertible	function	
by	restricting	the	domain.
5.	 (+)	Understand	the	inverse	relationship	between	exponents	and	
logarithms	and	use	this	relationship	to	solve	problems	involving	
logarithms	and	exponents.
Linear , Quadratic, and exponential models★  f-Le
Construct and compare linear, quadratic, and exponential models 
and solve problems
1.	 Distinguish	between	situations	that	can	be	modeled	with	linear	
functions	and	with	exponential	functions.
a.	 Prove	that	linear	functions	grow	by	equal	differences	over	equal	
intervals,	and	that	exponential	functions	grow	by	equal	factors	
over	equal	intervals.
b.	 Recognize	situations	in	which	one	quantity	changes	at	a	constant	
rate	per	unit	interval	relative	to	another.
c.	 Recognize	situations	in	which	a	quantity	grows	or	decays	by	a	
constant	percent	rate	per	unit	interval	relative	to	another.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — fUnCtIonS   |   71
2.	 Construct	linear	and	exponential	functions,	including	arithmetic	and	
geometric	sequences,	given	a	graph,	a	description	of	a	relationship,	or	
two	input-output	pairs	(include	reading	these	from	a	table).
3.	 Observe	using	graphs	and	tables	that	a	quantity	increasing	
exponentially	eventually	exceeds	a	quantity	increasing	linearly,	
quadratically,	or	(more	generally)	as	a	polynomial	function.
4.	 For	exponential	models,	express	as	a	logarithm	the	solution	to		
abct	=	d	where	a,	c,	and	d	are	numbers	and	the	base	b	is	2,	10,	or	e;	
evaluate	the	logarithm	using	technology.
Interpret expressions for functions in terms of the situation they 
model
5.	 Interpret	the	parameters	in	a	linear	or	exponential	function	in	terms	of	
a	context.
trigonometric functions   f-tf
Extend the domain of trigonometric functions using the unit circle
1.	 Understand	radian	measure	of	an	angle	as	the	length	of	the	arc	on	the	
unit	circle	subtended	by	the	angle.
2.	 Explain	how	the	unit	circle	in	the	coordinate	plane	enables	the	
extension	of	trigonometric	functions	to	all	real	numbers,	interpreted	as	
radian	measures	of	angles	traversed	counterclockwise	around	the	unit	
circle.
3.	 (+)	Use	special	triangles	to	determine	geometrically	the	values	of	sine,	
cosine,	tangent	for	π/3,	π/ 4	and	π/6,	and	use	the	unit	circle	to	express	
the	values	of	sine,	cosine,	and	tangent	for	π–x,	π+x,	and	2π–x	in	terms	
of	their	values	for	x,	where	x	is	any	real	number.
4.	 (+)	Use	the	unit	circle	to	explain	symmetry	(odd	and	even)	and	
periodicity	of	trigonometric	functions.	
Model periodic phenomena with trigonometric functions
5.	 Choose	trigonometric	functions	to	model	periodic	phenomena	with	
specified	amplitude,	frequency,	and	midline.★
6.	 (+)	Understand	that	restricting	a	trigonometric	function	to	a	domain	
on	which	it	is	always	increasing	or	always	decreasing	allows	its	inverse	
to	be	constructed.
7 .	 (+)	Use	inverse	functions	to	solve	trigonometric	equations	that	arise	
in	modeling	contexts;	evaluate	the	solutions	using	technology,	and	
interpret	them	in	terms	of	the	context.★
Prove and apply trigonometric identities
8.	 Prove	the	Pythagorean	identity	sin2(θ)	+	cos2(θ)	=	1	and	use	it	to	find	
sin(θ),	cos(θ),	or	tan(θ)	given	sin(θ),	cos(θ),	or	tan(θ)	and	the	quadrant	
of	the	angle.
9.	 (+)	Prove	the	addition	and	subtraction	formulas	for	sine,	cosine,	and	
tangent	and	use	them	to	solve	problems.