Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — modelInG   |   72
mathematics | High School—modeling
Modeling	links	classroom	mathematics	and	statistics	to	everyday	life,	work,	and	
decision-making.	Modeling	is	the	process	of	choosing	and	using	appropriate	
mathematics	and	statistics	to	analyze	empirical	situations,	to	understand	them	
better,	and	to	improve	decisions.	Quantities	and	their	relationships	in	physical,	
economic,	public	policy,	social,	and	everyday	situations	can	be	modeled	using	
mathematical	and	statistical	methods.	When	making	mathematical	models,	
technology	is	valuable	for	varying	assumptions,	exploring	consequences,	and	
comparing	predictions	with	data.
A	model	can	be	very	simple,	such	as	writing	total	cost	as	a	product	of	unit	price	
and	number	bought,	or	using	a	geometric	shape	to	describe	a	physical	object	like	
a	coin.	Even	such	simple	models	involve	making	choices.	It	is	up	to	us	whether	
to	model	a	coin	as	a	three-dimensional	cylinder,	or	whether	a	two-dimensional	
disk	works	well	enough	for	our	purposes.	Other	situations—modeling	a	delivery	
route,	a	production	schedule,	or	a	comparison	of	loan	amortizations—need	more	
elaborate	models	that	use	other	tools	from	the	mathematical	sciences.	Real-world	
situations	are	not	organized	and	labeled	for	analysis;	formulating	tractable	models,	
representing	such	models,	and	analyzing	them	is	appropriately	a	creative	process.	
Like	every	such	process,	this	depends	on	acquired	expertise	as	well	as	creativity.
Some	examples	of	such	situations	might	include:
•	 Estimating	how	much	water	and	food	is	needed	for	emergency	
relief	in	a	devastated	city	of	3	million	people,	and	how	it	might	be	
distributed.	
•	 Planning	a	table	tennis	tournament	for	7	players	at	a	club	with	4	
tables,	where	each	player	plays	against	each	other	player.
•	 Designing	the	layout	of	the	stalls	in	a	school	fair	so	as	to	raise	as	
much	money	as	possible.
•	 Analyzing	stopping	distance	for	a	car.	
•	 Modeling	savings	account	balance,	bacterial	colony	growth,	or	
investment	growth.
•	 Engaging	in	critical	path	analysis,	e.g.,	applied	to	turnaround	of	an	
aircraft	at	an	airport.
•	 Analyzing	risk	in	situations	such	as	extreme	sports,	pandemics,	
and	terrorism.
•	 Relating	population	statistics	to	individual	predictions.
In	situations	like	these,	the	models	devised	depend	on	a	number	of	factors:	How	
precise	an	answer	do	we	want	or	need?	What	aspects	of	the	situation	do	we	most	
need	to	understand,	control,	or	optimize?	What	resources	of	time	and	tools	do	we	
have?	The	range	of	models	that	we	can	create	and	analyze	is	also	constrained	by	
the	limitations	of	our	mathematical,	statistical,	and	technical	skills,	and	our	ability	
to	recognize	significant	variables	and	relationships	among	them.	Diagrams	of	
various	kinds,	spreadsheets	and	other	technology,	and	algebra	are	powerful	tools	
for	understanding	and	solving	problems	drawn	from	different	types	of	real-world	
situations.
One	of	the	insights	provided	by	mathematical	modeling	is	that	essentially	the	same	
mathematical	or	statistical	structure	can	sometimes	model	seemingly	different	
situations.	Models	can	also	shed	light	on	
the	mathematical	structures	themselves,	
for	example,	as	when	a	model	of	bacterial	
growth	makes	more	vivid	the	explosive	
growth	of	the	exponential	function.
The	basic	modeling	cycle	is	summarized	in	the	diagram.	It	
involves	(1)	identifying	variables	in	the	situation	and	selecting	
those	that	represent	essential	features,	(2)	formulating	
a	model	by	creating	and	selecting	geometric,	graphical,	
tabular,	algebraic,	or	statistical	representations	that	describe	
relationships	between	the	variables,	(3)	analyzing	and	performing	operations	
on	these	relationships	to	draw	conclusions,	(4)	interpreting	the	results	of	the	
mathematics	in	terms	of	the	original	situation,	(5)	validating	the	conclusions	by	
comparing	them	with	the	situation,	and	then	either	improving	the	model	or,	if	it	

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — modelInG   |   73
is	acceptable,	(6)	reporting	on	the	conclusions	and	the	reasoning	behind	them.	
Choices,	assumptions,	and	approximations	are	present	throughout	this	cycle.
In	descriptive	modeling,	a	model	simply	describes	the	phenomena	or	summarizes	
them	in	a	compact	form.	Graphs	of	observations	are	a	familiar	descriptive	model—
for	example,	graphs	of	global	temperature	and	atmospheric	CO2	over	time.	
Analytic	modeling	seeks	to	explain	data	on	the	basis	of	deeper	theoretical	ideas,	
albeit	with	parameters	that	are	empirically	based;	for	example,	exponential	growth	
of	bacterial	colonies	(until	cut-off	mechanisms	such	as	pollution	or	starvation	
intervene)	follows	from	a	constant	reproduction	rate.	Functions	are	an	important	
tool	for	analyzing	such	problems.	
Graphing	utilities,	spreadsheets,	computer	algebra	systems,	and	dynamic	geometry	
software	are	powerful	tools	that	can	be	used	to	model	purely	mathematical	
phenomena	(e.g.,	the	behavior	of	polynomials)	as	well	as	physical	phenomena.
modeling Standards Modeling is best interpreted not as a collection of isolated 
topics but rather in relation to other standards. Making mathematical models is 
a Standard for Mathematical Practice, and specific modeling standards appear 
throughout the high school standards indicated by a star symbol (★).