Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — Geometry   |   74
mathematics | High School—Geometry
An	understanding	of	the	attributes	and	relationships	of	geometric	objects	can	be	
applied	in	diverse	contexts—interpreting	a	schematic	drawing,	estimating	the	amount	
of	wood	needed	to	frame	a	sloping	roof,	rendering	computer	graphics,	or	designing	a	
sewing	pattern	for	the	most	efficient	use	of	material.	
Although	there	are	many	types	of	geometry,	school	mathematics	is	devoted	primarily	
to	plane	Euclidean	geometry,	studied	both	synthetically	(without	coordinates)	and	
analytically	(with	coordinates).	Euclidean	geometry	is	characterized	most	importantly	
by	the	Parallel	Postulate,	that	through	a	point	not	on	a	given	line	there	is	exactly	one	
parallel	line.	(Spherical	geometry,	in	contrast,	has	no	parallel	lines.)
During	high	school,	students	begin	to	formalize	their	geometry	experiences	from	
elementary	and	middle	school,	using	more	precise	definitions	and	developing	careful	
proofs.	Later	in	college	some	students	develop	Euclidean	and	other	geometries	carefully	
from	a	small	set	of	axioms.
The	concepts	of	congruence,	similarity,	and	symmetry	can	be	understood	from	
the	perspective	of	geometric	transformation.	Fundamental	are	the	rigid	motions:	
translations,	rotations,	reflections,	and	combinations	of	these,	all	of	which	are	here	
assumed	to	preserve	distance	and	angles	(and	therefore	shapes	generally).	Reflections	
and	rotations	each	explain	a	particular	type	of	symmetry,	and	the	symmetries	of	an	
object	offer	insight	into	its	attributes—as	when	the	reflective	symmetry	of	an	isosceles	
triangle	assures	that	its	base	angles	are	congruent.	
In	the	approach	taken	here,	two	geometric	figures	are	defined	to	be	congruent	if	there	
is	a	sequence	of	rigid	motions	that	carries	one	onto	the	other.	This	is	the	principle	
of	superposition.	For	triangles,	congruence	means	the	equality	of	all	corresponding	
pairs	of	sides	and	all	corresponding	pairs	of	angles.	During	the	middle	grades,	through	
experiences	drawing	triangles	from	given	conditions,	students	notice	ways	to	specify	
enough	measures	in	a	triangle	to	ensure	that	all	triangles	drawn	with	those	measures	are	
congruent.	Once	these	triangle	congruence	criteria	(ASA,	SAS,	and	SSS)	are	established	
using	rigid	motions,	they	can	be	used	to	prove	theorems	about	triangles,	quadrilaterals,	
and	other	geometric	figures.	
Similarity	transformations	(rigid	motions	followed	by	dilations)	define	similarity	
in	the	same	way	that	rigid	motions	define	congruence,	thereby	formalizing	the	
similarity	ideas	of	"same	shape"	and	"scale	factor"	developed	in	the	middle	grades.	
These	transformations	lead	to	the	criterion	for	triangle	similarity	that	two	pairs	of	
corresponding	angles	are	congruent.
The	definitions	of	sine,	cosine,	and	tangent	for	acute	angles	are	founded	on	right	
triangles	and	similarity,	and,	with	the	Pythagorean	Theorem,	are	fundamental	in	many	
real-world	and	theoretical	situations.	The	Pythagorean	Theorem	is	generalized	to	non-
right	triangles	by	the	Law	of	Cosines.	T ogether,	the	Laws	of	Sines	and	Cosines	embody	
the	triangle	congruence	criteria	for	the	cases	where	three	pieces	of	information	suffice	
to	completely	solve	a	triangle.	Furthermore,	these	laws	yield	two	possible	solutions	in	
the	ambiguous	case,	illustrating	that	Side-Side-Angle	is	not	a	congruence	criterion.	
Analytic	geometry	connects	algebra	and	geometry,	resulting	in	powerful	methods	
of	analysis	and	problem	solving.	Just	as	the	number	line	associates	numbers	with	
locations	in	one	dimension,	a	pair	of	perpendicular	axes	associates	pairs	of	numbers	
with	locations	in	two	dimensions.	This	correspondence	between	numerical	coordinates	
and	geometric	points	allows	methods	from	algebra	to	be	applied	to	geometry	and	vice	
versa.	The	solution	set	of	an	equation	becomes	a	geometric	curve,	making	visualization	
a	tool	for	doing	and	understanding	algebra.	Geometric	shapes	can	be	described	by	
equations,	making	algebraic	manipulation	into	a	tool	for	geometric	understanding,	
modeling,	and	proof.	Geometric	transformations	of	the	graphs	of	equations	correspond	
to	algebraic	changes	in	their	equations.
Dynamic	geometry	environments	provide	students	with	experimental	and	modeling	
tools	that	allow	them	to	investigate	geometric	phenomena	in	much	the	same	way	as	
computer	algebra	systems	allow	them	to	experiment	with	algebraic	phenomena.
Connections to Equations. The	correspondence	between	numerical	coordinates	
and	geometric	points	allows	methods	from	algebra	to	be	applied	to	geometry	and	vice	
versa.	The	solution	set	of	an	equation	becomes	a	geometric	curve,	making	visualization	
a	tool	for	doing	and	understanding	algebra.	Geometric	shapes	can	be	described	by	
equations,	making	algebraic	manipulation	into	a	tool	for	geometric	understanding,	
modeling,	and	proof.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — Geometry   |   75
Congruence
• experiment with transformations in the plane
• Understand congruence in terms of rigid 
motions
• Prove geometric theorems 
• make geometric constructions
Similarity, Right Triangles, and Trigonometry
• Understand similarity in terms of similarity 
transformations
• Prove theorems involving similarity 
• define trigonometric ratios and solve problems 
involving right triangles
• apply trigonometry to general triangles
Circles
• Understand and apply theorems about circles
• find arc lengths and areas of sectors of circles 
Expressing Geometric Properties with Equations
• translate between the geometric description 
and the equation for a conic section
• Use coordinates to prove simple geometric 
theorems algebraically
Geometric Measurement and Dimension
• explain volume formulas and use them to solve 
problems
• Visualize relationships between two-
dimensional and three-dimensional objects
Modeling with Geometry
• apply geometric concepts in modeling 
situations
mathematical Practices 
1.	 	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.		 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.		 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.		 Model	with	mathematics.
5.		 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.		 Attend	to	precision.
7 .		 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.		 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
Geometry overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — Geometry   |   76
Congruence  G-Co
Experiment with transformations in the plane
1.	 Know	precise	definitions	of	angle,	circle,	perpendicular	line,	parallel	
line,	and	line	segment,	based	on	the	undefined	notions	of	point,	line,	
distance	along	a	line,	and	distance	around	a	circular	arc.
2.	 Represent	transformations	in	the	plane	using,	e.g.,	transparencies	
and	geometry	software;	describe	transformations	as	functions	that	
take	points	in	the	plane	as	inputs	and	give	other	points	as	outputs.	
Compare	transformations	that	preserve	distance	and	angle	to	those	
that	do	not	(e.g.,	translation	versus	horizontal	stretch).
3.	 Given	a	rectangle,	parallelogram,	trapezoid,	or	regular	polygon,	
describe	the	rotations	and	reflections	that	carry	it	onto	itself.
4.	 Develop	definitions	of	rotations,	reflections,	and	translations	in	terms	
of	angles,	circles,	perpendicular	lines,	parallel	lines,	and	line	segments.
5.	 Given	a	geometric	figure	and	a	rotation,	reflection,	or	translation,	
draw	the	transformed	figure	using,	e.g.,	graph	paper,	tracing	paper,	or	
geometry	software.	Specify	a	sequence	of	transformations	that	will	
carry	a	given	figure	onto	another.
Understand congruence in terms of rigid motions
6.	 Use	geometric	descriptions	of	rigid	motions	to	transform	figures	and	
to	predict	the	effect	of	a	given	rigid	motion	on	a	given	figure;	given	
two	figures,	use	the	definition	of	congruence	in	terms	of	rigid	motions	
to	decide	if	they	are	congruent.
7 .	 Use	the	definition	of	congruence	in	terms	of	rigid	motions	to	show	
that	two	triangles	are	congruent	if	and	only	if	corresponding	pairs	of	
sides	and	corresponding	pairs	of	angles	are	congruent.	
8.	 Explain	how	the	criteria	for	triangle	congruence	(ASA,	SAS,	and	SSS)	
follow	from	the	definition	of	congruence	in	terms	of	rigid	motions.
Prove geometric theorems
9.	 Prove	theorems	about	lines	and	angles. Theorems include: vertical 
angles are congruent; when a transversal crosses parallel lines, alternate 
interior angles are congruent and corresponding angles are congruent; 
points on a perpendicular bisector of a line segment are exactly those 
equidistant from the segment’s endpoints.
10.	 Prove	theorems	about	triangles.	Theorems include: measures of interior 
angles of a triangle sum to 180°; base angles of isosceles triangles are 
congruent; the segment joining midpoints of two sides of a triangle is 
parallel to the third side and half the length; the medians of a triangle 
meet at a point. 
11.	 Prove	theorems	about	parallelograms.	Theorems include: opposite 
sides are congruent, opposite angles are congruent, the diagonals 
of a parallelogram bisect each other, and conversely, rectangles are 
parallelograms with congruent diagonals.
Make geometric constructions
12.	 Make	formal	geometric	constructions	with	a	variety	of	tools	and	
methods	(compass	and	straightedge,	string,	reflective	devices,	
paper	folding,	dynamic	geometric	software,	etc.).	Copying a segment; 
copying an angle; bisecting a segment; bisecting an angle; constructing 
perpendicular lines, including the perpendicular bisector of a line segment; 
and constructing a line parallel to a given line through a point not on the 
line.
13.	 Construct	an	equilateral	triangle,	a	square,	and	a	regular	hexagon	
inscribed	in	a	circle.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — Geometry   |   77
Similarity, right triangles, and trigonometry   G-Srt
Understand similarity in terms of similarity transformations
1.	 Verify	experimentally	the	properties	of	dilations	given	by	a	center	and	
a	scale	factor:
a.	 A	dilation	takes	a	line	not	passing	through	the	center	of	the	
dilation	to	a	parallel	line,	and	leaves	a	line	passing	through	the	
center	unchanged.
b.	 The	dilation	of	a	line	segment	is	longer	or	shorter	in	the	ratio	
given	by	the	scale	factor.	
2.	 Given	two	figures,	use	the	definition	of	similarity	in	terms	of	similarity	
transformations to	decide	if	they	are	similar;	explain	using	similarity	
transformations	the	meaning	of	similarity	for	triangles	as	the	equality	
of	all	corresponding	pairs	of	angles	and	the	proportionality	of	all	
corresponding	pairs	of	sides.	
3.	 Use	the	properties	of	similarity	transformations	to	establish	the	AA	
criterion	for	two	triangles	to	be	similar.	
Prove theorems involving similarity
4.	 Prove	theorems	about	triangles.	Theorems include: a line parallel to one 
side of a triangle divides the other two proportionally, and conversely; the 
Pythagorean Theorem proved using triangle similarity.
5.	 Use	congruence	and	similarity	criteria	for	triangles	to	solve	problems	
and	to	prove	relationships	in	geometric	figures.
Define trigonometric ratios and solve problems involving right 
triangles
6.	 Understand	that	by	similarity,	side	ratios	in	right	triangles	are	
properties	of	the	angles	in	the	triangle,	leading	to	definitions	of	
trigonometric	ratios	for	acute	angles.	
7 .	 Explain	and	use	the	relationship	between	the	sine	and	cosine	of	
complementary	angles.	
8.	 Use	trigonometric	ratios	and	the	Pythagorean	Theorem	to	solve	right	
triangles	in	applied	problems.★
Apply trigonometry to general triangles
9.	 (+)	Derive	the	formula	A	=	1/2	ab	sin(C)	for	the	area	of	a	triangle	by	
drawing	an	auxiliary	line	from	a	vertex	perpendicular	to	the	opposite	
side.	
10.	 (+)	Prove	the	Laws	of	Sines	and	Cosines	and	use	them	to	solve	
problems.
11.	 (+)	Understand	and	apply	the	Law	of	Sines	and	the	Law	of	Cosines	
to	find	unknown	measurements	in	right	and	non-right	triangles	(e.g.,	
surveying	problems,	resultant	forces).
Circles  G-C
Understand and apply theorems about circles
1.	 Prove	that	all	circles	are	similar.
2.	 Identify	and	describe	relationships	among	inscribed	angles,	radii,	
and	chords.	Include the relationship between central, inscribed, and 
circumscribed angles; inscribed angles on a diameter are right angles; 
the radius of a circle is perpendicular to the tangent where the radius 
intersects the circle. 
3.	 Construct	the	inscribed	and	circumscribed	circles	of	a	triangle,	and	
prove	properties	of	angles	for	a	quadrilateral	inscribed	in	a	circle.
4.	 (+)	Construct	a	tangent	line	from	a	point	outside	a	given	circle	to	the	
circle.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — Geometry   |   78
Find arc lengths and areas of sectors of circles 
5.	 Derive	using	similarity	the	fact	that	the	length	of	the	arc	intercepted	
by	an	angle	is	proportional	to	the	radius,	and	define	the	radian	
measure	of	the	angle	as	the	constant	of	proportionality;	derive	the	
formula	for	the	area	of	a	sector.	
expressing Geometric Properties with equations  G-GPe
Translate between the geometric description and the equation for a 
conic section 
1.	 Derive	the	equation	of	a	circle	of	given	center	and	radius	using	the	
Pythagorean	Theorem;	complete	the	square	to	find	the	center	and	
radius	of	a	circle	given	by	an	equation.
2.	 	Derive	the	equation	of	a	parabola	given	a	focus	and	directrix.
3.	 (+)	Derive	the	equations	of	ellipses	and	hyperbolas	given	the	foci,	
using	the	fact	that	the	sum	or	difference	of	distances	from	the	foci	is	
constant.
Use coordinates to prove simple geometric theorems algebraically
4.	 Use	coordinates	to	prove	simple	geometric	theorems	algebraically.	For 
example, prove or disprove that a figure defined by four given points in the 
coordinate plane is a rectangle; prove or disprove that the point (1, √3) lies 
on the circle centered at the origin and containing the point (0, 2).
5.	 Prove	the	slope	criteria	for	parallel	and	perpendicular	lines	and	use	
them	to	solve	geometric	problems	(e.g.,	find	the	equation	of	a	line	
parallel	or	perpendicular	to	a	given	line	that	passes	through	a	given	
point).
6.	 Find	the	point	on	a	directed	line	segment	between	two	given	points	
that	partitions	the	segment	in	a	given	ratio.
7 .	 Use	coordinates	to	compute	perimeters	of	polygons	and	areas	of	
triangles	and	rectangles,	e.g.,	using	the	distance	formula.★
Geometric measurement and dimension  G-Gmd
Explain volume formulas and use them to solve problems
1.	 Give	an	informal	argument	for	the	formulas	for	the	circumference	of	
a	circle,	area	of	a	circle,	volume	of	a	cylinder,	pyramid,	and	cone.	Use 
dissection arguments, Cavalieri’s principle, and informal limit arguments.
2.	 (+)	Give	an	informal	argument	using	Cavalieri’s	principle	for	the	
formulas	for	the	volume	of	a	sphere	and	other	solid	figures.
3.	 Use	volume	formulas	for	cylinders,	pyramids,	cones,	and	spheres	to	
solve	problems.★
Visualize relationships between two-dimensional and three-
dimensional objects
4.	 Identify	the	shapes	of	two-dimensional	cross-sections	of	three-
dimensional	objects,	and	identify	three-dimensional	objects	generated	
by	rotations	of	two-dimensional	objects.
modeling with Geometry  G-mG
Apply geometric concepts in modeling situations
1.	 Use	geometric	shapes,	their	measures,	and	their	properties	to	describe	
objects	(e.g.,	modeling	a	tree	trunk	or	a	human	torso	as	a	cylinder).★
2.	 Apply	concepts	of	density	based	on	area	and	volume	in	modeling	
situations	(e.g.,	persons	per	square	mile,	BTUs	per	cubic	foot).★
3.	 Apply	geometric	methods	to	solve	design	problems	(e.g.,	designing	
an	object	or	structure	to	satisfy	physical	constraints	or	minimize	cost;	
working	with	typographic	grid	systems	based	on	ratios).★