Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — StatIStICS   |   79
mathematics | High School—Statistics 
and Probability★
Decisions	or	predictions	are	often	based	on	data—numbers	in	context.	These	
decisions	or	predictions	would	be	easy	if	the	data	always	sent	a	clear	message,	but	
the	message	is	often	obscured	by	variability.	Statistics	provides	tools	for	describing	
variability	in	data	and	for	making	informed	decisions	that	take	it	into	account.
Data	are	gathered,	displayed,	summarized,	examined,	and	interpreted	to	discover	
patterns	and	deviations	from	patterns.	Quantitative	data	can	be	described	in	terms	
of	key	characteristics:	measures	of	shape,	center,	and	spread.	The	shape	of	a	data	
distribution	might	be	described	as	symmetric,	skewed,	flat,	or	bell	shaped,	and	it	
might	be	summarized	by	a	statistic	measuring	center	(such	as	mean	or	median)	
and	a	statistic	measuring	spread	(such	as	standard	deviation	or	interquartile	range).	
Different	distributions	can	be	compared	numerically	using	these	statistics	or	
compared	visually	using	plots.	Knowledge	of	center	and	spread	are	not	enough	to	
describe	a	distribution.	Which	statistics	to	compare,	which	plots	to	use,	and	what	
the	results	of	a	comparison	might	mean,	depend	on	the	question	to	be	investigated	
and	the	real-life	actions	to	be	taken.	
Randomization	has	two	important	uses	in	drawing	statistical	conclusions.	First,	
collecting	data	from	a	random	sample	of	a	population	makes	it	possible	to	draw	
valid	conclusions	about	the	whole	population,	taking	variability	into	account.	
Second,	randomly	assigning	individuals	to	different	treatments	allows	a	fair	
comparison	of	the	effectiveness	of	those	treatments.	A	statistically	significant	
outcome	is	one	that	is	unlikely	to	be	due	to	chance	alone,	and	this	can	be	evaluated	
only	under	the	condition	of	randomness.	The	conditions	under	which	data	are	
collected	are	important	in	drawing	conclusions	from	the	data;	in	critically	reviewing	
uses	of	statistics	in	public	media	and	other	reports,	it	is	important	to	consider	the	
study	design,	how	the	data	were	gathered,	and	the	analyses	employed	as	well	as	
the	data	summaries	and	the	conclusions	drawn.	
Random	processes	can	be	described	mathematically	by	using	a	probability	model:	
a	list	or	description	of	the	possible	outcomes	(the	sample	space),	each	of	which	is	
assigned	a	probability.	In	situations	such	as	flipping	a	coin,	rolling	a	number	cube,	
or	drawing	a	card,	it	might	be	reasonable	to	assume	various	outcomes	are	equally	
likely.	In	a	probability	model,	sample	points	represent	outcomes	and	combine	to	
make	up	events;	probabilities	of	events	can	be	computed	by	applying	the	Addition	
and	Multiplication	Rules.	Interpreting	these	probabilities	relies	on	an	understanding	
of	independence	and	conditional	probability,	which	can	be	approached	through	the	
analysis	of	two-way	tables.
T echnology	plays	an	important	role	in	statistics	and	probability	by	making	it	
possible	to	generate	plots,	regression	functions,	and	correlation	coefficients,	and	to	
simulate	many	possible	outcomes	in	a	short	amount	of	time.
Connections to Functions and Modeling.	Functions	may	be	used	to	describe	
data;	if	the	data	suggest	a	linear	relationship,	the	relationship	can	be	modeled	
with	a	regression	line,	and	its	strength	and	direction	can	be	expressed	through	a	
correlation	coefficient.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — StatIStICS   |   80
Interpreting Categorical and Quantitative Data
• Summarize, represent, and interpret data on a 
single count or measurement variable 
• Summarize, represent, and interpret data on 
two categorical and quantitative variables 
• Interpret linear models
Making Inferences and Justifying Conclusions
• Understand and evaluate random processes 
underlying statistical experiments
• make inferences and justify conclusions from 
sample surveys, experiments and observational 
studies
Conditional Probability and the Rules of Prob-
ability
• Understand independence and conditional 
probability and use them to interpret data
• Use the rules of probability to compute 
probabilities of compound events in a uniform 
probability model
Using Probability to Make Decisions
• Calculate expected values and use them to 
solve problems
• Use probability to evaluate outcomes of 
decisions
mathematical Practices 
1.	 	 Make	sense	of	problems	and	persevere	in	
solving	them.
2.		 Reason	abstractly	and	quantitatively.
3.		 Construct	viable	arguments	and	critique	
the	reasoning	of	others.
4.		 Model	with	mathematics.
5.		 Use	appropriate	tools	strategically.
6.		 Attend	to	precision.
7 .		 Look	for	and	make	use	of	structure.
8.		 Look	for	and	express	regularity	in	repeated	
reasoning.
Statistics and Probability overview

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — StatIStICS   |   81
Interpreting Categorical and Quantitative data   S-Id
Summarize, represent, and interpret data on a single count or 
measurement variable 
1.	 Represent	data	with	plots	on	the	real	number	line	(dot	plots,	
histograms,	and	box	plots).	
2.	 Use	statistics	appropriate	to	the	shape	of	the	data	distribution	to	
compare	center	(median,	mean)	and	spread	(interquartile	range,	
standard	deviation)	of	two	or	more	different	data	sets.	
3.	 Interpret	differences	in	shape,	center,	and	spread	in	the	context	of	
the	data	sets,	accounting	for	possible	effects	of	extreme	data	points	
(outliers).
4.	 Use	the	mean	and	standard	deviation	of	a	data	set	to	fit	it	to	a	normal	
distribution	and	to	estimate	population	percentages.	Recognize	that	
there	are	data	sets	for	which	such	a	procedure	is	not	appropriate.	
Use	calculators,	spreadsheets,	and	tables	to	estimate	areas	under	the	
normal	curve.
Summarize, represent, and interpret data on two categorical and 
quantitative variables 
5.	 Summarize	categorical	data	for	two	categories	in	two-way	frequency	
tables.	Interpret	relative	frequencies	in	the	context	of	the	data	
(including	joint,	marginal,	and	conditional	relative	frequencies).	
Recognize	possible	associations	and	trends	in	the	data.
6.	 Represent	data	on	two	quantitative	variables	on	a	scatter	plot,	and	
describe	how	the	variables	are	related.
a.	 Fit	a	function	to	the	data;	use	functions	fitted	to	data	to	solve	
problems	in	the	context	of	the	data.	Use given functions or choose 
a function suggested by the context. Emphasize linear, quadratic, and 
exponential models.
b.	 Informally	assess	the	fit	of	a	function	by	plotting	and	analyzing	
residuals.
c.	 Fit	a	linear	function	for	a	scatter	plot	that	suggests	a	linear	
association.	
Interpret linear models
7 .	 Interpret	the	slope	(rate	of	change)	and	the	intercept	(constant	term)	
of	a	linear	model	in	the	context	of	the	data.
8.	 Compute	(using	technology)	and	interpret	the	correlation	coefficient	
of	a	linear	fit.
9.	 Distinguish	between	correlation	and	causation.
making Inferences and Justifying Conclusions   S-IC
Understand and evaluate random processes underlying statistical 
experiments
1.	 Understand	statistics	as	a	process	for	making	inferences	about	
population	parameters	based	on	a	random	sample	from	that	
population.
2.	 Decide	if	a	specified	model	is	consistent	with	results	from	a	given	
data-generating	process,	e.g.,	using	simulation.	For example, a model 
says a spinning coin falls heads up with probability 0.5. Would a result of 5 
tails in a row cause you to question the model?
Make inferences and justify conclusions from sample surveys, 
experiments, and observational studies
3.	 Recognize	the	purposes	of	and	differences	among	sample	surveys,	
experiments,	and	observational	studies;	explain	how	randomization	
relates	to	each.	

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — StatIStICS   |   82
4.	 Use	data	from	a	sample	survey	to	estimate	a	population	mean	or	
proportion;	develop	a	margin	of	error	through	the	use	of	simulation	
models	for	random	sampling.
5.	 Use	data	from	a	randomized	experiment	to	compare	two	treatments;	
use	simulations	to	decide	if	differences	between	parameters	are	
significant.
6.	 Evaluate	reports	based	on	data.
Conditional Probability and the rules of Probability   S-CP
Understand independence and conditional probability and use them 
to interpret data
1.	 Describe	events	as	subsets	of	a	sample	space	(the	set	of	outcomes)	
using	characteristics	(or	categories)	of	the	outcomes,	or	as	unions,	
intersections,	or	complements	of	other	events	(“or,”	“and,”	“not”).
2.	 Understand	that	two	events	A	and	B	are	independent	if	the	probability	
of	A	and	B	occurring	together	is	the	product	of	their	probabilities,	and	
use	this	characterization	to	determine	if	they	are	independent.
3.	 	Understand	the	conditional	probability	of	A	given	B	as P(A	and	
B)/P(B),	and	interpret	independence	of	A	and	B	as	saying	that	the	
conditional	probability	of A	given B	is	the	same	as	the	probability	
of	A,	and	the	conditional	probability	of	B	given	A	is	the	same	as	the	
probability	of	B.
4.	 Construct	and	interpret	two-way	frequency	tables	of	data	when	two	
categories	are	associated	with	each	object	being	classified.	Use	the	
two-way	table	as	a	sample	space	to	decide	if	events	are	independent	
and	to	approximate	conditional	probabilities.	For example, collect 
data from a random sample of students in your school on their favorite 
subject among math, science, and English. Estimate the probability that a 
randomly selected student from your school will favor science given that 
the student is in tenth grade. Do the same for other subjects and compare 
the results. 
5.	 Recognize	and	explain	the	concepts	of	conditional	probability	and	
independence	in	everyday	language	and	everyday	situations.	For 
example, compare the chance of having lung cancer if you are a smoker 
with the chance of being a smoker if you have  lung cancer.
Use the rules of probability to compute probabilities of compound 
events in a uniform probability model
6.	 Find	the	conditional	probability	of	A	given	B	as	the	fraction	of	B’s	
outcomes	that	also	belong	to	A,	and	interpret	the	answer	in	terms	of	
the	model.
7 .	 Apply	the	Addition	Rule,	P(A	or	B)	=	P(A)	+	P(B)	–	P(A	and	B),	and	
interpret	the	answer	in	terms	of	the	model.
8.	 (+)	Apply	the	general	Multiplication	Rule	in	a	uniform	probability	
model,	P(A	and	B)	=	P(A)P(B|A)	=	P(B)P(A|B),	and	interpret	the	answer	
in	terms	of	the	model.
9.	 (+)	Use	permutations	and	combinations	to	compute	probabilities	of	
compound	events	and	solve	problems.
Using Probability to make decisions S-md
Calculate expected values and use them to solve problems
1.	 (+)	Define	a	random	variable	for	a	quantity	of	interest	by	assigning	
a	numerical	value	to	each	event	in	a	sample	space;	graph	the	
corresponding	probability	distribution	using	the	same	graphical	
displays	as	for	data	distributions.
2.	 (+)	Calculate	the	expected	value	of	a	random	variable;	interpret	it	as	
the	mean	of	the	probability	distribution.

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
HIGH SCHool — StatIStICS   |   83
3.	 (+)	Develop	a	probability	distribution	for	a	random	variable	defined	
for	a	sample	space	in	which	theoretical	probabilities	can	be	calculated;	
find	the	expected	value.	For example, find the theoretical probability 
distribution for the number of correct answers obtained by guessing on 
all five questions of a multiple-choice test where each question has four 
choices, and find the expected grade under various grading schemes. 
4.	 (+)	Develop	a	probability	distribution	for	a	random	variable	defined	
for	a	sample	space	in	which	probabilities	are	assigned	empirically;	find	
the	expected	value.	For example, find a current data distribution on the 
number of TV sets per household in the United States, and calculate the 
expected number of sets per household. How many TV sets would you 
expect to find in 100 randomly selected households?
Use probability to evaluate outcomes of decisions
5.	 (+)	Weigh	the	possible	outcomes	of	a	decision	by	assigning	
probabilities	to	payoff	values	and	finding	expected	values.	
a.	 Find	the	expected	payoff	for	a	game	of	chance.	For example, find 
the expected winnings from a state lottery ticket or a game at a fast-
food restaurant.
b.	 Evaluate	and	compare	strategies	on	the	basis	of	expected	values.	
For example, compare a high-deductible versus a low-deductible 
automobile insurance policy using various, but reasonable, chances of 
having a minor or a major accident.
6.	 (+)	Use	probabilities	to	make	fair	decisions	(e.g.,	drawing	by	lots,	using	
a	random	number	generator).
7 .	 (+)	Analyze	decisions	and	strategies	using	probability	concepts	(e.g.,	
product	testing,	medical	testing,	pulling	a	hockey	goalie	at	the	end	of	
a	game).

Common Core State StandardS for matHematICS
84
note on courses and transitions
The	high	school	portion	of	the	Standards	for	Mathematical	Content	specifies	the	
mathematics	all	students	should	study	for	college	and	career	readiness.	These	
standards	do	not	mandate	the	sequence	of	high	school	courses.	However,	the	
organization	of	high	school	courses	is	a	critical	component	to	implementation	
of	the	standards.	T o	that	end,	sample	high	school	pathways	for	mathematics	–	in	
both	a	traditional	course	sequence	(Algebra	I,	Geometry,	and	Algebra	II)	as	well	
as	an	integrated	course	sequence	(Mathematics	1,	Mathematics	2,	Mathematics	3)	
–	will	be	made	available	shortly	after	the	release	of	the	final	Common	Core	State	
Standards.	It	is	expected	that	additional	model	pathways	based	on	these	standards	
will	become	available	as	well.
The	standards	themselves	do	not	dictate	curriculum,	pedagogy,	or	delivery	of	
content.	In	particular,	states	may	handle	the	transition	to	high	school	in	different	
ways.	For	example,	many	students	in	the	U.S.	today	take	Algebra	I	in	the	8th	
grade,	and	in	some	states	this	is	a	requirement.	The	K-7	standards	contain	the	
prerequisites	to	prepare	students	for	Algebra	I	by	8th	grade,	and	the	standards	are	
designed	to	permit	states	to	continue	existing	policies	concerning	Algebra	I	in	8th	
grade.
A	second	major	transition	is	the	transition	from	high	school	to	post-secondary	
education	for	college	and	careers.	The	evidence	concerning	college	and	career	
readiness	shows	clearly	that	the	knowledge,	skills,	and	practices	important	for	
readiness	include	a	great	deal	of	mathematics	prior	to	the	boundary	defined	by	
(+)	symbols	in	these	standards.	Indeed,	some	of	the	highest	priority	content	for	
college	and	career	readiness	comes	from	Grades	6-8.	This	body	of	material	includes	
powerfully	useful	proficiencies	such	as	applying	ratio	reasoning	in	real-world	and	
mathematical	problems,	computing	fluently	with	positive	and	negative	fractions	
and	decimals,	and	solving	real-world	and	mathematical	problems	involving	
angle	measure,	area,	surface	area,	and	volume.	Because	important	standards	for	
college	and	career	readiness	are	distributed	across	grades	and	courses,	systems	
for	evaluating	college	and	career	readiness	should	reach	as	far	back	in	the	
standards	as	Grades	6-8.	It	is	important	to	note	as	well	that	cut	scores	or	other	
information	generated	by	assessment	systems	for	college	and	career	readiness	
should	be	developed	in	collaboration	with	representatives	from	higher	education	
and	workforce	development	programs,	and	should	be	validated	by	subsequent	
performance	of	students	in	college	and	the	workforce.